AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF THE WEALTH OF NATIONS
by Adam Smith 
1776
                          BOOK TWO 
OF THE NATURE, ACCUMULATION, AND EMPLOYMENT OF STOCK 
                 INTRODUCTION 
     IN that rude state of society in which there is no division
of labour, in which exchanges are seldom made, and in which every
man provides everything for himself, it is not necessary that any
stock should be accumulated or stored up beforehand in order to
carry on the business of the society. Every man endeavours to
supply by his own industry his own occasional wants as they
occur. When he is hungry, he goes to the forest to hunt; when his
coat is worn out, he clothes himself with the skin of the first
large animal he kills: and when his hut begins to go to ruin, he
repairs it, as well as he can, with the trees and the turf that
are nearest it.
     But when the division of labour has once been thoroughly
introduced, the produce of a man's own labour can supply but a
very small part of his occasional wants. The far greater part of
them are supplied by the produce of other men's labour, which he
purchases with the produce, or, what is the same thing, with the
price of the produce of his own. But this purchase cannot be made
till such time as the produce of his own labour has not only been
completed, but sold. A stock of goods of different kinds,
therefore, must be stored up somewhere sufficient to maintain
him, and to supply him with the materials and tools of his work
till such time, at least, as both these events can be brought
about. A weaver cannot apply himself entirely to his peculiar
business, unless there is beforehand stored up somewhere, either
in his own possession or in that of some other person, a stock
sufficient to maintain him, and to supply him with the materials
and tools of his work, till he has not only completed, but sold
his web. This accumulation must, evidently, be previous to his
applying his industry for so long a time to such a peculiar
business.
     As the accumulation of stock must, in the nature of things,
be previous to the division of labour, so labour can be more and
more subdivided in proportion only as stock is previously more
and more accumulated. The quantity of materials which the same
number of people can work up, increases in a great proportion as
labour comes to be more and more subdivided; and as the
operations of each workman are gradually reduced to a greater
degree of simplicity, a variety of new machines come to be
invented for facilitating and abridging those operations. As the
division of labour advances, therefore, in order to give constant
employment to an equal number of workmen, an equal stock of
provisions, and a greater stock of materials and tools than what
would have been necessary in a ruder state of things, must be
accumulated beforehand. But the number of workmen in every branch
of business generally increases with the division of labour in
that branch, or rather it is the increase of their number which
enables them to class and subdivide themselves in this manner.
     As the accumulation of stock is previously necessary for
carrying on this great improvement in the productive powers of
labour, so that accumulation naturally leads to this improvement.
The person who employs his stock in maintaining labour,
necessarily wishes to employ it in such a manner as to produce as
great a quantity of work as possible. He endeavours, therefore,
both to make among his workmen the most proper distribution of
employment, and to furnish them with the best machines which he
can either invent or afford to purchase. His abilities in both
these respects are generally in proportion to the extent of his
stock, or to the number of people whom it can employ. The
quantity of industry, therefore, not only increases in every
country with the increase of the stock which employs it, but, in
consequence of that increase, the same quantity of industry
produces a much greater quantity of work.
     Such are in general the effects of the increase of stock
upon industry and its productive powers.
     In the following book I have endeavoured to explain the
nature of stock, the effects of its accumulation into capitals of
different kinds, and the effects of the different employments of
those capitals. This book is divided into five chapters. In the
first chapter, I have endeavoured to show what are the different
parts or branches into which the stock, either of an individual,
or of a great society, naturally divides itself. In the second, I
have endeavoured to explain the nature and operation of money
considered as a particular branch of the general stock of the
society. The stock which is accumulated into a capital, may
either be employed by the person to whom it belongs, or it may be
lent to some other person. In the third and fourth chapters, I
have endeavoured to examine the manner in which it operates in
both these situations. The fifth and last chapter treats of the
different effects which the different employments of capital
immediately produce upon the quantity both of national industry,
and of the annual produce of land and labour. 

                             CHAPTER I

                     Of the Division of Stock 

     WHEN the stock which a man possesses is no more than
sufficient to maintain him for a few days or a few weeks, he
seldom thinks of deriving any revenue from it. He consumes it as
sparingly as he can, and endeavours by his labour to acquire
something which may supply its place before it be consumed
altogether. His revenue is, in this case, derived from his labour
only. This is the state of the greater part of the labouring poor
in all countries.
     But when he possesses stock sufficient to maintain him for
months or years, he naturally endeavours to derive a revenue from
the greater part of it; reserving only so much for his immediate
consumption as may maintain him till this revenue begins to come
in. His whole stock, therefore, is distinguished into two parts.
That part which, he expects, is to afford him this revenue, is
called his capital. The other is that which supplies his
immediate consumption; and which consists either, first, in that
portion of his whole stock which was originally reserved for this
purpose; or, secondly, in his revenue, from whatever source
derived, as it gradually comes in; or, thirdly, in such things as
had been purchased by either of these in former years, and which
are not yet entirely consumed; such as a stock of clothes,
household furniture, and the like. In one, or other, or all of
these three articles, consists the stock which men commonly
reserve for their own immediate consumption.
     There are two different ways in which a capital may be
employed so as to yield a revenue or profit to its employer.
     First, it may be employed in raising, manufacturing, or
purchasing goods, and selling them again with a profit. The
capital employed in this manner yields no revenue or profit to
its employer, while it either remains in his possession, or
continues in the same shape. The goods of the merchant yield him
no revenue or profit till he sells them for money, and the money
yields him as little till it is again exchanged for goods. His
capital is continually going from him in one shape, and returning
to him in another, and it is only by means of such circulation,
or successive exchanges, that it can yield him any profit. Such
capitals, therefore, may very properly be called circulating
capitals.
     Secondly, it may be employed in the improvement of land, in
the purchase of useful machines and instruments of trade, or in
suchlike things as yield a revenue or profit without changing
masters, or circulating any further. Such capitals, therefore,
may very properly be called fixed capitals.
     Different occupations require very different proportions
between the fixed and circulating capitals employed in them.
     The capital of a merchant, for example, is altogether a
circulating capital. He has occasion for no machines or
instruments of trade, unless his shop, or warehouse, be
considered as such.
     Some part of the capital of every master artificer or
manufacturer must be fixed in the instruments of his trade. This
part, however, is very small in some, and very great in others. A
master tailor requires no other instruments of trade but a parcel
of needles. Those of the master shoemaker are a little, though
but a very little, more expensive. Those of the weaver rise a
good deal above those of the shoemaker. The far greater part of
the capital of all such master artificers, however, is
circulated, either in the wages of their workmen, or in the price
of their materials, and repaid with a profit by the price of the
work.
     In other works a much greater fixed capital is required. In
a great iron-work, for example, the furnace for melting the ore,
the forge, the slitt-mill, are instruments of trade which cannot
be erected without a very great expense. In coal-works and mines
of every kind, the machinery necessary both for drawing out the
water and for other purposes is frequently still more expensive.
     That part of the capital of the farmer which is employed in
the instruments of agriculture is a fixed, that which is employed
in the wages and maintenance of his labouring servants, is a
circulating capital. He makes a profit of the one by keeping it
in his own possession, and of the other by parting with it. The
price or value of his labouring cattle is a fixed capital in the
same manner as that of the instruments of husbandry. Their
maintenance is a circulating capital in the same manner as that
of the labouring servants. The farmer makes his profit by keeping
the labouring cattle, and by parting with their maintenance. Both
the price and the maintenance of the cattle which are brought in
and fattened, not for labour, but for sale, are a circulating
capital. The farmer makes his profit by parting with them. A
flock of sheep or a herd of cattle that, in a breeding country,
is bought in, neither for labour, nor for sale, but in order to
make a profit by their wool, by their milk, and by their
increase, is a fixed capital. The profit is made by keeping them.
Their maintenance is a circulating capital. The profit is made by
parting with it; and it comes back with both its own profit and
the profit upon the whole price of the cattle, in the price of
the wool, the milk, and the increase. The whole value of the
seed, too, is properly a fixed capital. Though it goes backwards
and forwards between the ground and the granary, it never changes
masters, and therefore does not properly circulate. The farmer
makes his profit, not by its sale, but by its increase.
     The general stock of any country or society is the same with
that of all its inhabitants or members, and therefore naturally
divides itself into the same three portions, each of which has a
distinct function or office.
     The first is that portion which is reserved for immediate
consumption, and of which the characteristic is, that it affords
no revenue or profit. It consists in the stock of food, clothes,
household furniture, etc., which have been purchased by their
proper consumers, but which are not yet entirely consumed. The
whole stock of mere dwelling-houses too, subsisting at any one
time in the country, make a part of this first portion. The stock
that is laid out in a house, if it is to be the dwellinghouse of
the proprietor, ceases from that moment to serve in the function
of a capital, or to afford any revenue to its owner. A
dwellinghouse, as such, contributes nothing to the revenue of its
inhabitant; and though it is, no doubt, extremely useful to him,
it is as his clothes and household furniture are useful to him,
which, however, makes a part of his expense, and not of his
revenue. If it is to be let to a tenant for rent, as the house
itself can produce nothing, the tenant must always pay the rent
out of some other revenue which he derives either from labour, or
stock, or land. Though a house, therefore, may yield a revenue to
its proprietor, and thereby serve in the function of a capital to
him, it cannot yield any to the public, nor serve in the function
of a capital to it, and the revenue of the whole body of the
people can never be in the smallest degree increased by it.
Clothes, and household furniture, in the same manner, sometimes
yield a revenue, and thereby serve in the function of a capital
to particular persons. In countries where masquerades are common,
it is a trade to let out masquerade dresses for a night.
Upholsterers frequently let furniture by the month or by the
year. Undertakers let the furniture of funerals by the day and by
the week. Many people let furnished houses, and get a rent, not
only for the use of the house, but for that of the furniture. The
revenue, however, which is derived from such things must always
be ultimately drawn from some other source of revenue. Of all
parts of the stock, either of an individual, or of a society,
reserved for immediate consumption, what is laid out in houses is
most slowly consumed. A stock of clothes may last several years:
a stock of furniture half a century or a century: but a stock of
houses, well built and properly taken care of, may last many
centuries. Though the period of their total consumption, however,
is more distant, they are still as really a stock reserved for
immediate consumption as either clothes or household furniture.
     The second of the three portions into which the general
stock of the society divides itself, is the fixed capital, of
which the characteristic is, that it affords a revenue or profit
without circulating or changing masters. It consists chiefly of
the four following articles:
     First, of all useful machines and instruments of trade which
facilitate and abridge labour:
     Secondly, of all those profitable buildings which are the
means of procuring a revenue, not only to their proprietor who
lets them for a rent, but to the person who possesses them and
pays that rent for them; such as shops, warehouses, workhouses,
farmhouses, with all their necessary buildings; stables,
granaries, etc. These are very different from mere dwelling
houses. They are a sort of instruments of trade, and may be
considered in the same light:
     Thirdly, of the improvements of land, of what has been
profitably laid out in clearing, draining, enclosing, manuring,
and reducing it into the condition most proper for tillage and
culture. An improved farm may very justly be regarded in the same
light as those useful machines which facilitate and abridge
labour, and by means of which an equal circulating capital can
afford a much greater revenue to its employer. An improved farm
is equally advantageous and more durable than any of those
machines, frequently requiring no other repairs than the most
profitable application of the farmer's capital employed in
cultivating it:
     Fourthly, of the acquired and useful abilities of all the
inhabitants or members of the society. The acquisition of such
talents, by the maintenance of the acquirer during his education,
study, or apprenticeship, always costs a real expense, which is a
capital fixed and realized, as it were, in his person. Those
talents, as they make a part of his fortune, so do they likewise
of that of the society to which he belongs. The improved
dexterity of a workman may be considered in the same light as a
machine or instrument of trade which facilitates and abridges
labour, and which, though it costs a certain expense, repays that
expense with a profit.
     The third and last of the three portions into which the
general stock of the society naturally divides itself, is the
circulating capital; of which the characteristic is, that it
affords a revenue only by circulating or changing masters. It is
composed likewise of four parts:
     First, of the money by means of which all the other three
are circulated and distributed to their proper consumers:
     Secondly, of the stock of provisions which are in the
possession of the butcher, the grazier, the farmer, the
corn-merchant, the brewer, etc., and from the sale of which they
expect to derive a profit:
     Thirdly, of the materials, whether altogether rude, or more
or less manufactured, of clothes, furniture, and building, which
are not yet made up into any of those three shapes, but which
remain in the hands of the growers, the manufacturers, the
mercers and drapers, the timber merchants, the carpenters and
joiners, the brickmakers, etc.
     Fourthly, and lastly, of the work which is made up and
completed, but which is still in the hands of the merchant or
manufacturer, and not yet disposed of or distributed to the
proper consumers; such as the finished work which we frequently
find ready-made in the shops of the smith, the cabinet-maker, the
goldsmith, the jeweller, the china-merchant, etc. The circulating
capital consists in this manner, of the provisions, materials,
and finished work of all kinds that are in the hands of their
respective dealers, and of the money that is necessary for
circulating and distributing them to those who are finally to use
or to consume them.
     Of these four parts, three- provisions, materials, and
finished work- are, either annually, or in a longer or shorter
period, regularly withdrawn from it, and placed either in the
fixed capital or in the stock reserved for immediate consumption.
     Every fixed capital is both originally derived from, and
requires to be continually supported by a circulating capital.
All useful machines and instruments of trade are originally
derived from a circulating capital, which furnishes the materials
of which they are made, and the maintenance of the workmen who
make them. They require, too, a capital of the same kind to keep
them in constant repair.
     No fixed capital can yield any revenue but by means of a
circulating capital. The most useful machines and instruments of
trade will produce nothing without the circulating capital which
affords the materials they are employed upon, and the maintenance
of the workmen who employ them. Land, however improved, will
yield no revenue without a circulating capital, which maintains
the labourers who cultivate and collect its produce.
     To maintain and augment the stock which may be reserved for
immediate consumption is the sole end and purpose both of the
fixed and circulating capitals. It is this stock which feeds,
clothes, and lodges the people. Their riches or poverty depends
upon the abundant or sparing supplies which those two capitals
can afford to the stock reserved for immediate consumption.
     So great a part of the circulating capital being continually
withdrawn from it, in order to be placed in the other two
branches of the general stock of the society; it must in its turn
require continual supplies, without which it would soon cease to
exist. These supplies are principally drawn from three sources,
the produce of land, of mines, and of fisheries. These afford
continual supplies of provisions and materials, of which part is
afterwards wrought up into finished work, and by which are
replaced the provisions, materials, and finished work continually
withdrawn from the circulating capital. From mines, too, is drawn
what is necessary for maintaining and augmenting that part of it
which consists in money. For though, in the ordinary course of
business, this part is not, like the other three, necessarily
withdrawn from it, in order to be placed in the other two
branches of the general stock of the society, it must, however,
like all other things, be wasted and worn out at last, and
sometimes, too, be either lost or sent abroad, and must,
therefore, require continual, though, no doubt, much smaller
supplies.
     Land, mines, and fisheries, require all both a fixed and a
circulating capital to cultivate them; and their produce replaces
with a profit, not only those capitals, but all the others in the
society. Thus the farmer annually replaces to the manufacturer
the provisions which he had consumed and the materials which be
had wrought up the year before; and the manufacturer replaces to
the farmer the finished work which he had wasted and worn out in
the same time. This is the real exchange that is annually made
between those two orders of people, though it seldom happens that
the rude produce of the one and the manufactured produce of the
other, are directly bartered for one another; because it seldom
happens that the farmer sells his corn and his cattle, his flax
and his wool, to the very same person of whom he chooses to
purchase the clothes, furniture, and instruments of trade which
he wants. He sells, therefore, his rude produce for money, with
which he can purchase, wherever it is to be had, the manufactured
produce he has occasion for. Land even replaces, in part at
least, the capitals with which fisheries and mines are
cultivated. It is the produce of land which draws the fish from
the waters; and it is the produce of the surface of the earth
which extracts the minerals from its bowels.
     The produce of land, mines, and fisheries, when their
natural fertility is equal, is in proportion to the extent and
proper application of the capitals employed about them. When the
capitals are equal and equally well applied, it is in proportion
to their natural fertility.
     In all countries where there is tolerable security, every
man of common understanding will endeavour to employ whatever
stock he can command in procuring either present enjoyment or
future profit. If it is employed in procuring present enjoyment,
it is a stock reserved for immediate consumption. If it is
employed in procuring future profit, it must procure this profit
either staying with him, or by going from him. In the one case it
is fixed, in the other it is a circulating capital. A man must be
perfectly crazy who, where there is tolerable security, does not
employ all the stock which he commands, whether be his own or
borrowed of other people, in some one or other of those three
ways.
     In those unfortunate countries, indeed, where men are
continually afraid of the violence of their superiors, they
frequently bury and conceal a great part of their stock, in order
to have it always at hand to carry with them to some place of
safety, in case of their being threatened with any of those
disasters to which they consider themselves as at all times
exposed. This is said to be a common practice in Turkey, in
Indostan, and, I believe, in most other governments of Asia. It
seems to have been a common practice among our ancestors during
the violence of the feudal government. Treasure-trove was in
those times considered as no contemptible part of the revenue of
the greatest sovereigns in Europe. It consisted in such treasure
as was found concealed in the earth, and to which no particular
person could prove any right. This was regarded in those times as
so important an object, that it was always considered as
belonging to the sovereign, and neither to the finder nor to the
proprietor of the land, unless the right to it had been conveyed
to the latter by an express clause in his charter. It was put
upon the same footing with gold and silver mines, which, without
a special clause in the charter, were never supposed to be
comprehended in the general grant of the lands, though mines of
lead, copper, tin, and coal were as things of smaller
consequence. 

                             CHAPTER II 

Of Money considered as a particular Branch of the general Stock
of the Society, or of the Expense of maintaining the National
Capital 

     IT has been shown in the first book, that the price of the
greater part of commodities resolves itself into three parts, of
which one pays the wages of the labour, another the profits of
the stock, and a third the rent of the land which had been
employed in producing and bringing them to market: that there
are, indeed, some commodities of which the price is made up of
two of those parts only, the wages of labour, and the profits of
stock: and a very few in which it consists altogether in one, the
wages of labour: but that the price of every commodity
necessarily resolves itself into some one, or other, or all of
these three parts; every part of it which goes neither to rent
nor to wages, being necessarily profit to somebody.
     Since this is the case, it has been observed, with regard to
every particular commodity, taken separately, it must be so with
regard to all the commodities which compose the whole annual
produce of the land and labour of every country, taken complexly.
The whole price or exchangeable value of that annual produce must
resolve itself into the same three parts, and be parcelled out
among the different inhabitants of the country, either as the
wages of their labour, the profits of their stock, or the rent of
their land.
     But though the whole value of the annual produce of the land
and labour of every country is thus divided among and constitutes
a revenue to its different inhabitants, yet as in the rent of a
private estate we distinguish between the gross rent and the net
rent, so may we likewise in the revenue of all the inhabitants of
a great country.
     The gross rent of a private estate comprehends whatever is
paid by the farmer; the net rent, what remains free to the
landlord, after deducting the expense of management, of repairs,
and all other necessary charges; or what, without hurting his
estate, he can afford to place in his stock reserved for
immediate consumption, or to spend upon his table, equipage, the
ornaments of his house and furniture, his private enjoyments and
amusements. His real wealth is in proportion, not to his gross,
but to his net rent.
     The gross revenue of all the inhabitants of a great country
comprehends the whole annual produce of their land and labour;
the net revenue, what remains free to them after deducting the
expense of maintaining- first, their fixed, and, secondly, their
circulating capital; or what, without encroaching upon their
capital, they can place in their stock reserved for immediate
consumption, or spend upon their subsistence, conveniencies, and
amusements. Their real wealth, too, is in proportion, not to
their gross, but to their net revenue.
     The whole expense of maintaining the fixed capital must
evidently be excluded from the net revenue of the society.
Neither the materials necessary for supporting their useful
machines and instruments of trade, their profitable buildings,
etc., nor the produce of the labour necessary for fashioning
those materials into the proper form, can ever make any part of
it. The price of that labour may indeed make a part of it; as the
workmen so employed may place the whole value of their wages in
their stock reserved for immediate consumption. But in other
sorts of labour, both the price and the produce go to this stock,
the price to that of the workmen, the produce to that of other
people, whose subsistence, conveniences, and amusements, are
augmented by the labour of those workmen.
     The intention of the fixed capital is to increase the
productive powers of labour, or to enable the same number of
labourers to perform a much greater quantity of work. In a farm
where all the necessary buildings, fences, drains,
communications, etc., are in the most perfect good order, the
same number of labourers and labouring cattle will raise a much
greater produce than in one of equal extent and equally good
ground, but not furnished with equal conveniencies. In
manufactures the same number of hands, assisted with the best
machinery, will work up a much greater quantity of goods than
with more imperfect instruments of trade. The expense which is
properly laid out upon a fixed capital of any kind, is always
repaid with great profit, and increases the annual produce by a
much greater value than that of the support which such
improvements require. This support, however, still requires a
certain portion of that produce. A certain quantity of materials,
and the labour of a certain number of workmen, both of which
might have been immediately employed to augment the food,
clothing and lodging, the subsistence and conveniencies of the
society, are thus diverted to another employment, highly
advantageous indeed, but still different from this one. It is
upon this account that all such improvements in mechanics, as
enable the same number of workmen to perform an equal quantity of
work, with cheaper and simpler machinery than had been usual
before, are always regarded as advantageous to every society. A
certain quantity of materials, and the labour of a certain number
of workmen, which had before been employed in supporting a more
complex and expensive machinery, can afterwards be applied to
augment the quantity of work which that or any other machinery is
useful only for performing. The undertaker of some great
manufactory who employs a thousand a year in the maintenance of
his machinery, if he can reduce this expense to five hundred will
naturally employ the other five hundred in purchasing an
additional quantity of materials to be wrought up by an
additional number of workmen. The quantity of that work,
therefore, which his machinery was useful only for performing,
will naturally be augmented, and with it all the advantage and
conveniency which the society can derive from that work.
     The expense of maintaining the fixed capital in a great
country may very properly be compared to that of repairs in a
private estate. The expense of repairs may frequently be
necessary for supporting the produce of the estate, and
consequently both the gross and the net rent of the landlord.
When by a more proper direction, however, it can be diminished
without occasioning any diminution of produce, the gross rent
remains at least the same as before, and the net rent is
necessarily augmented.
     But though the whole expense of maintaining the fixed
capital is thus necessarily excluded from the net revenue of the
society, it is not the same case with that of maintaining the
circulating capital. Of the four parts of which this latter
capital is composed- money, provisions, materials, and finished
work- the three last, it has already been observed, are regularly
withdrawn from it, and placed either in the fixed capital of the
society, or in their stock reserved for immediate consumption.
Whatever portion of those consumable goods is employed in
maintaining the former, goes all to the latter, and makes a part
of the net revenue of the society. The maintenance of those three
parts of the circulating capital, therefore, withdraws no portion
of the annual produce from the net revenue of the society,
besides what is necessary for maintaining the fixed capital.
     The circulating capital of a society is in this respect
different from that of an individual. That of an individual is
totally excluded from making any part of his net revenue, which
must consist altogether in his profits. But though the
circulating capital of every individual makes a part of that of
the society to which he belongs, it is not upon that account
totally excluded from making a part likewise of their net
revenue. Though the whole goods in a merchant's shop must by no
means be placed in his own stock reserved for immediate
consumption, they may in that of other people, who, from a
revenue derived from other funds, may regularly replace their
value to him, together with its profits, without occasioning any
diminution either of his capital or of theirs.
     Money, therefore, is the only part of the circulating
capital of a society, of which the maintenance can occasion any
diminution in their net revenue.
     The fixed capital, and that part of the circulating capital
which consists in money, so far as they affect the revenue of the
society, bear a very great resemblance to one another.
     First, as those machines and instruments of trade, etc.,
require a certain expense, first to erect them, and afterwards to
support them, both which expenses, though they make a part of the
gross, are deductions from the net revenue of the society; so the
stock of money which circulates in any country must require a
certain expense, first to collect it, and afterwards to support
it, both which expenses, though they make a part of the gross,
are, in the same manner, deductions from the net revenue of the
society. A certain quantity of very valuable materials, gold and
silver, and of very curious labour, instead of augmenting the
stock reserved for immediate consumption, the subsistence,
conveniencies, and amusements of individuals, is employed in
supporting that great but expensive instrument of commerce, by
means of which every individual in the society has his
subsistence, conveniencies, and amusements regularly distributed
to him in their proper proportions.
     Secondly, as the machines and instruments of a trade, etc.,
which compose the fixed capital either of an individual or of a
society, make no part either of the gross or of the net revenue
of either; so money, by means of which the whole revenue of the
society is regularly distributed among all its different members,
makes itself no part of that revenue. The great wheel of
circulation is altogether different from the goods which are
circulated by means of it. The revenue of the society consists
altogether in those goods, and not in the wheel which circulates
them. In computing either the gross or the net revenue of any
society, we must always, from their whole annual circulation of
money and goods, deduct the whole value of the money, of which
not a single farthing can ever make any part of either.
     It is the ambiguity of language only which can make this
proposition appear either doubtful or paradoxical. When properly
explained and understood, it is almost self-evident.
     When we talk of any particular sum of money, we sometimes
mean nothing but the metal pieces of which it is composed; and
sometimes we include in our meaning some obscure reference to the
goods which can be had in exchange for it, or to the power of
purchasing which the possession of it conveys. Thus when we say
that the circulating money of England has been computed at
eighteen millions, we mean only to express the amount of the
metal pieces, which some writers have computed, or rather have
supposed to circulate in that country. But when we say that a man
is worth fifty or a hundred pounds a year, we mean commonly to
express not only the amount of the metal pieces which are
annually paid to him, but the value of the goods which he can
annually purchase or consume. We mean commonly to ascertain what
is or ought to be his way of living, or the quantity and quality
of the necessaries and conveniencies of life in which he can with
propriety indulge himself.
     When, by any particular sum of money, we mean not only to
express the amount of the metal pieces of which it is composed,
but to include in its signification some obscure reference to the
goods which can be had in exchange for them, the wealth or
revenue which it in this case denotes, is equal only to one of
the two values which are thus intimated somewhat ambiguously by
the same word, and to the latter more properly than to the
former, to the money's worth more properly than to the money.
     Thus if a guinea be the weekly pension of a particular
person, he can in the course of the week purchase with it a
certain quantity of subsistence, conveniencies, and amusements.
In proportion as this quantity is great or small, so are his real
riches, his real weekly revenue. His weekly revenue is certainly
not equal both to the guinea, and to what can be purchased with
it, but only to one or other of those two equal values; and to
the latter more properly than to the former, to the guinea's
worth rather than to the guinea.
     If the pension of such a person was paid to him, not in
gold, but in a weekly bill for a guinea, his revenue surely would
not so properly consist in the piece of paper, as in what he
could get for it. A guinea may be considered as a bill for a
certain quantity of necessaries and conveniencies upon all the
tradesmen in the neighbourhood. The revenue of the person to whom
it is paid, does not so properly consist in the piece of gold, as
in what he can get for it, or in what he can exchange it for. If
it could be exchanged for nothing, it would, like a bill upon a
bankrupt, be of no more value than the most useless piece of
paper.
     Though the weekly or yearly revenue of all the different
inhabitants of any country, in the same manner, may be, and in
reality frequently is paid to them in money, their real riches,
however, the real weekly or yearly revenue of all of them taken
together, must always be great or small in proportion to the
quantity of consumable goods which they can all of them purchase
with this money. The whole revenue of all of them taken together
is evidently not equal to both the money and the consumable
goods; but only to one or other of those two values, and to the
latter more properly than to the former.
     Though we frequently, therefore, express a person's revenue
by the metal pieces which are annually paid to him, it is because
the amount of those pieces regulates the extent of his power of
purchasing, or the value of the goods which he can annually
afford to consume. We still consider his revenue as consisting in
this power of purchasing or consuming, and not in the pieces
which convey it.
     But if this is sufficiently evident even with regard to an
individual, it is still more so with regard to a society. The
amount of the metal pieces which are annually paid to an
individual, is often precisely equal to his revenue, and is upon
that account the shortest and best expression of its value. But
the amount of the metal pieces which circulate in a society can
never be equal to the revenue of all its members. As the same
guinea which pays the weekly pension of one man to-day, may pay
that of another to-morrow, and that of a third the day
thereafter, the amount of the metal pieces which annually
circulate in any country must always be of much less value than
the whole money pensions annually paid with them. But the power
of purchasing, or the goods which can successively be bought with
the whole of those money pensions as they are successively paid,
must always be precisely of the same value with those pensions;
as must likewise be the revenue of the different persons to whom
they are paid. That revenue, therefore, cannot consist in those
metal pieces, of which the amount is so much inferior to its
value, but in the power of purchasing, in the goods which can
successively be bought with them as they circulate from hand to
hand.
     Money, therefore, the great wheel of circulation, the great
instrument of commerce, like all other instruments of trade,
though it makes a part and a very valuable part of the capital,
makes no part of the revenue of the society to which it belongs;
and though the metal pieces of which it is composed, in the
course of their annual circulation, distribute to every man the
revenue which properly belongs to him, they make themselves no
part of that revenue.
     Thirdly, and lastly, the machines and instruments of trade,
etc., which compose the fixed capital, bear this further
resemblance to that part of the circulating capital which
consists in money; that as every saving in the expense of
erecting and supporting those machines, which does not diminish
the productive powers of labour, is an improvement of the net
revenue of the society, so every saving in the expense of
collecting and supporting that part of the circulating capital
which consists in money, is an improvement of exactly the same
kind.
     It is sufficiently obvious, and it has partly, too, been
explained already, in what manner every saving in the expense of
supporting the fixed capital is an improvement of the net revenue
of the society. The whole capital of the undertaker of every work
is necessarily divided between his fixed and his circulating
capital. While his whole capital remains the same, the smaller
the one part, the greater must necessarily be the other. It is
the circulating capital which furnishes the materials and wages
of labour, and puts industry into motion. Every saving,
therefore, in the expense of maintaining the fixed capital, which
does not diminish the productive powers of labour, must increase
the fund which puts industry into motion, and consequently the
annual produce of land and labour, the real revenue of every
society.
     The substitution of paper in the room of gold and silver
money, replaces a very expensive instrument of commerce with one
much less costly, and sometimes equally convenient. Circulation
comes to be carried on by a new wheel, which it costs less both
to erect and to maintain than the old one. But in what manner
this operation is performed, and in what manner it tends to
increase either the gross or the net revenue of the society, is
not altogether so obvious, and may therefore require some further
explication.
     There are several different sorts of paper money; but the
circulating notes of banks and bankers are the species which is
best known, and which seems best adapted for this purpose.
     When the people of any particular country have such
confidence in the fortune, probity, and prudence of a particular
banker, as to believe that he is always ready to pay upon demand
such of his promissory notes as are likely to be at any time
presented to him; those notes come to have the same currency as
gold and silver money, from the confidence that such money can at
any time be had for them.
     A particular banker lends among his customers his own
promissory notes, to the extent, we shall suppose, of a hundred
thousand pounds. As those notes serve all the purposes of money,
his debtors pay him the same interest as if he had lent them so
much money. This interest is the source of his gain. Though some
of those notes are continually coming back upon him for payment,
part of them continue to circulate for months and years together.
Though he has generally in circulation, therefore, notes to the
extent of a hundred thousand pounds, twenty thousand pounds in
gold and silver may frequently be a sufficient provision for
answering occasional demands. By this operation, therefore,
twenty thousand pounds in gold and silver perform all the
functions which a hundred thousand could otherwise have
performed. The same exchanges may be made, the same quantity of
consumable goods may be circulated and distributed to their
proper consumers, by means of his promissory notes, to the value
of a hundred thousand pounds, as by an equal value of gold and
silver money. Eighty thousand pounds of gold and silver,
therefore, can, in this manner, be spared from the circulation of
the country; and if different operations of the same kind should,
at the same time, be carried on by many different banks and
bankers, the whole circulation may thus be conducted with a fifth
part only of the gold and silver which would otherwise have been
requisite.
     Let us suppose, for example, that the whole circulating
money of some particular country amounted, at a particular time,
to one million sterling, that sum being then sufficient for
circulating the whole annual produce of their land and labour.
Let us suppose, too, that some time thereafter, different banks
and bankers issued promissory notes, payable to the bearer, to
the extent of one million, reserving in their different coffers
two hundred thousand pounds for answering occasional demands.
There would remain, therefore, in circulation, eight hundred
thousand pounds in gold and silver, and a million of bank notes,
or eighteen hundred thousand pounds of paper and money together.
But the annual produce of the land and labour of the country had
before required only one million to circulate and distribute it
to its proper consumers, and that annual produce cannot be
immediately augmented by those operations of banking. One
million, therefore, will be sufficient to circulate it after
them. The goods to be bought and sold being precisely the same as
before, the same quantity of money will be sufficient for buying
and selling them. The channel of circulation, if I may be allowed
such an expression, will remain precisely the same as before. One
million we have supposed sufficient to fill that channel.
Whatever, therefore, is poured into it beyond this sum cannot run
in it, but must overflow. One million eight hundred thousand
pounds are poured into it. Eight hundred thousand pounds,
therefore, must overflow, that sum being over and above what can
be employed in the circulation of the country. But though this
sum cannot be employed at home, it is too valuable to be allowed
to lie idle. It will, therefore, be sent abroad, in order to seek
that profitable employment which it cannot find at home. But the
paper cannot go abroad; because at a distance from the banks
which issue it, and from the country in which payment of it can
be exacted by law, it will not be received in common payments.
Gold and silver, therefore, to the amount of eight hundred
thousand pounds will be sent abroad, and the channel of home
circulation will remain filled with a million of paper, instead
of the million of those metals which filled it before.
     But though so great a quantity of gold and silver is thus
sent abroad, we must not imagine that it is sent abroad for
nothing, or that its proprietors make a present of it to foreign
nations. They will exchange it for foreign goods of some kind or
another, in order to supply the consumption either of some other
foreign country or of their own.
     If they employ it in purchasing goods in one foreign country
in order to supply the consumption of another, or in what is
called the carrying trade, whatever profit they make will be an
addition to the net revenue of their own country. It is like a
new fund, created for carrying on a new trade; domestic business
being now transacted by paper, and the gold and silver being
converted into a fund for this new trade.
     If they employ it in purchasing foreign goods for home
consumption, they may either, first, purchase such goods as are
likely to be consumed by idle people who produce nothing, such as
foreign wines, foreign silks, etc.; or, secondly, they may
purchase an additional stock of materials, tools, and provisions,
in order to maintain and employ an additional number of
industrious people, who reproduce, with a profit, the value of
their annual consumption.
     So far as it is employed in the first way, it promotes
prodigality, increases expense and consumption without increasing
production, or establishing any permanent fund for supporting
that expense, and is in every respect hurtful to the society.
     So far as it is employed in the second way, it promotes
industry; and though it increases the consumption of the society,
it provides a permanent fund for supporting that consumption, the
people who consume reproducing, with a profit, the whole value of
their annual consumption. The gross revenue of the society, the
annual produce of their land and labour, is increased by the
whole value which the labour of those workmen adds to the
materials upon which they are employed; and their net revenue by
what remains of this value, after deducting what is necessary for
supporting the tools and instruments of their trade.
     That the greater part of the gold and silver which, being
forced abroad by those operations of banking, is employed in
purchasing foreign goods for home consumption, is and must be
employed in purchasing those of this second kind, seems not only
probable but almost unavoidable. Though some particular men may
sometimes increase their expense very considerably though their
revenue does not increase at all, we may be assured that no class
or order of men ever does so; because, though the principles of
common prudence do not always govern the conduct of every
individual, they always influence that of the majority of every
class or order. But the revenue of idle people, considered as a
class or order, cannot, in the smallest degree, be increased by
those operations of banking. Their expense in general, therefore,
cannot be much increased by them, though that of a few
individuals among them may, and in reality sometimes is. The
demand of idle people, therefore, for foreign goods being the
same, or very nearly the same, as before, a very small part of
the money, which being forced abroad by those operations of
banking, is employed in purchasing foreign goods for home
consumption, is likely to be employed in purchasing those for
their use. The greater part of it will naturally be destined for
the employment of industry, and not for the maintenance of
idleness.
     When we compute the quantity of industry which the
circulating capital of any society can employ, we must always
have regard to those parts of it only which consist in
provisions, materials, and finished work: the other, which
consists in money, and which serves only to circulate those
three, must always be deducted. In order to put industry into
motion, three things are requisite; materials to work upon, tools
to work with, and the wages or recompense for the sake of which
the work is done. Money is neither a material to work upon, nor a
tool to work with; and though the wages of the workman are
commonly paid to him in money, his real revenue, like that of all
other men, consists, not in money, but in the money's worth; not
in the metal pieces, but in what can be got for them.
     The quantity of industry which any capital can employ must,
evidently, be equal to the number of workmen whom it can supply
with materials, tools, and a maintenance suitable to the nature
of the work. Money may be requisite for purchasing the materials
and tools of the work, as well as the maintenance of the workmen.
But the quantity of industry which the whole capital can employ
is certainly not equal both to the money which purchases, and to
the materials, tools, and maintenance, which are purchased with
it; but only to one or other of those two values, and to the
latter more properly than to the former.
     When paper is substituted in the room of gold and silver
money, the quantity of the materials, tools, and maintenance,
which the whole circulating capital can supply, may be increased
by the whole value of gold and silver which used to be employed
in purchasing them. The whole value of the great wheel of
circulation and distribution is added to the goods which are
circulated and distributed by means of it. The operation, in some
measure, resembles that of the undertaker of some great work,
who, in consequence of some improvement in mechanics, takes down
his old machinery, and adds the difference between its price and
that of the new to his circulating capital, to the fund from
which he furnishes materials and wages to his workmen.
     What is the proportion which the circulating money of any
country bears to the whole value of the annual produce circulated
by means of it, it is, perhaps, impossible to determine. It has
been computed by different authors at a fifth, at a tenth, at a
twentieth, and at a thirtieth part of that value. But how small
soever the proportion which the circulating money may bear to the
whole value of the annual produce, as but a part, and frequently
but a small part, of that produce, is ever destined for the
maintenance of industry, it must always bear a very considerable
proportion to that part. When, therefore, by the substitution of
paper, the gold and silver necessary for circulation is reduced
to, perhaps, a fifth part of the former quantity, if the value of
only the greater part of the other four-fifths be added to the
funds which are destined for the maintenance of industry, it must
make a very considerable addition to the quantity of that
industry, and, consequently, to the value of the annual produce
of land and labour.
     An operation of this kind has, within these five-and-twenty
or thirty years, been performed in Scotland, by the erection of
new banking companies in almost every considerable town, and even
in some country villages. The effects of it have been precisely
those above described. The business of the country is almost
entirely carried on by means of the paper of those different
banking companies, with which purchases and payments of kinds are
commonly made. Silver very seldom appears except in the change of
a twenty shillings bank note, and gold still seldomer. But though
the conduct of all those different companies has not been
unexceptionable, and has accordingly required an act of
Parliament to regulate it, the country, notwithstanding, has
evidently derived great benefit from their trade. I have heard it
asserted, that the trade of the city of Glasgow doubled in about
fifteen years after the first erection of the banks there; and
that the trade of Scotland has more than quadrupled since the
first erection of the two public banks at Edinburgh, of which the
one, called the Bank of Scotland, was established by act of
Parliament in 1695; the other, called the Royal Bank, by royal
charter in 1727. Whether the trade, either of Scotland in
general, or the city of Glasgow in particular, has really
increased in so great a proportion, during so short a period, I
do not pretend to know. If either of them has increased in this
proportion, it seems to be an effect too great to be accounted
for by the sole operation of this cause. That the trade and
industry of Scotland, however, have increased very considerably
during this period, and that the banks have contributed a good
deal to this increase, cannot be doubted.
     The value of the silver money which circulated in Scotland
before the union, in 1707, and which, immediately after it, was
brought into the Bank of Scotland in order to be recoined,
amounted to L411,117 10s. 9d. sterling. No account has been got
of the gold coin; but it appears from the ancient accounts of the
mint of Scotland, that the value of the gold annually coined
somewhat exceeded that of the silver. There were a good many
people, too, upon this occasion, who, from a diffidence of
repayment, did not bring their silver into the Bank of Scotland:
and there was, besides, some English coin which was not called
in. The whole value of the gold and silver, therefore, which
circulated in Scotland before the union, cannot be estimated at
less than a million sterling. It seems to have constituted almost
the whole circulation of that country; for though the circulation
of the Bank of Scotland, which had then no rival, was
considerable, it seems to have made but a very small part of the
whole. In the present times the whole circulation of Scotland
cannot be estimated at less than two millions, of which that part
which consists in gold and silver most probably does not amount
to half a million. But though the circulating gold and silver of
Scotland have suffered so great a diminution during this period,
its real riches and prosperity do not appear to have suffered
any. Its agriculture, manufactures, and trade, on the contrary,
the annual produce of its land and labour, have evidently been
augmented.
     It is chiefly by discounting bills of exchange, that is, by
advancing money upon them before they are due, that the greater
part of banks and bankers issue their promissory notes. They
deduct always, upon whatever sum they advance, the legal interest
till the bill shall become due. The payment of the bill, when it
becomes due, replaces to the bank the value of what had been
advanced, together with a clear profit of the interest. The
banker who advances to the merchant whose bill he discounts, not
gold and silver, but his own promissory notes, has the advantage
of being able to discount to a greater amount, by the whole value
of his promissory notes, which he finds by experience are
commonly in circulation. He is thereby enabled to make his clear
gain of interest on so much a larger sum.
     The commerce of Scotland, which at present is not very
great, was still more inconsiderable when the two first banking
companies were established, and those companies would have had
but little trade had they confined their business to the
discounting of bills of exchange. They invented, therefore,
another method of issuing their promissory notes; by granting
what they called cash accounts, that is by giving credit to the
extent of a certain sum (two or three thousand pounds, for
example) to any individual who could procure two persons of
undoubted credit and good landed estate to become surety for him,
that whatever money should be advanced to him, within the sum for
which the credit had been given, should be repaid upon demand,
together with the legal interest. Credits of this kind are, I
believe, commonly granted by banks and bankers in all different
parts of the world. But the easy terms upon which the Scotch
banking companies accept of repayment are, so far as I know,
peculiar to them, and have, perhaps, been the principal cause,
both of the great trade of those companies and of the benefit
which the country has received from it.
     Whoever has a credit of this kind with one of those
companies, and borrows a thousand pounds upon it, for example,
may repay this sum piecemeal, by twenty and thirty pounds at a
time, the company discounting a proportionable part of the
interest of the great sum from the day on which each of those
small sums is paid in till the whole be in this manner repaid.
All merchants, therefore, and almost all men of business, find it
convenient to keep such cash accounts with them, and are thereby
interested to promote the trade of those companies, by readily
receiving their notes in all payments, and by encouraging all
those with whom they have any influence to do the same. The
banks, when their customers apply to them for money, generally
advance it to them in their own promissory notes. These the
merchants pay away to the manufacturers for goods, the
manufacturers to the farmers for materials and provisions, the
farmers to their landlords for rent, the landlords repay them to
the merchants for the conveniencies and luxuries with which they
supply them, and the merchants again return them to the banks in
order to balance their cash accounts, or to replace what they may
have borrowed of them; and thus almost the whole money business
of the country is transacted by means of them. Hence the great
trade of those companies.
     By means of those cash accounts every merchant can, without
imprudence, carry on a greater trade than he otherwise could do.
If there are two merchants, one in London and the other in
Edinburgh, who employ equal stocks in the same branch of trade,
the Edinburgh merchant can, without imprudence, carry on a
greater trade and give employment to a greater number of people
than the London merchant. The London merchant must always keep by
him a considerable sum of money, either in his own coffers, or in
those of his banker, who gives him no interest for it, in order
to answer the demands continually coming upon him for payment of
the goods which he purchases upon credit. Let the ordinary amount
of this sum be supposed five hundred pounds. The value of the
goods in his warehouse must always be less by five hundred pounds
than it would have been had he not been obliged to keep such a
sum unemployed. Let us suppose that he generally disposes of his
whole stock upon hand, or of goods to the value of his whole
stock upon hand, once in the year. By being obliged to keep so
great a sum unemployed, he must sell in a year five hundred
pounds' worth less goods than he might otherwise have done. His
annual profits must be less by all that he could have made by the
sale of five hundred pounds worth more goods; and the number of
people employed in preparing his goods for the market must be
less by all those that five hundred pounds more stock could have
employed. The merchant in Edinburgh, on the other hand, keeps no
money unemployed for answering such occasional demands. When they
actually come upon him, he satisfies them from his cash account
with the bank, and gradually replaces the sum borrowed with the
money or paper which comes in from the occasional sales of his
goods. With the same stock, therefore, he can, without
imprudence, have at all times in his warehouse a larger quantity
of goods than the London merchant; and can thereby both make a
greater profit himself, and give constant employment to a greater
number of industrious people who prepare those goods for the
market. Hence the great benefit which the country has derived
from this trade.
     The facility of discounting bills of exchange it may be
thought indeed, gives the English merchants a conveniency
equivalent to the cash accounts of the Scotch merchants. But the
Scotch merchants, it must be remembered, can discount their bills
of exchange as easily as the English merchants; and have,
besides, the additional conveniency of their cash accounts.
     The whole paper money of every kind which can easily
circulate in any country never can exceed the value of the gold
and silver, of which it supplies the place, or which (the
commerce being supposed the same) would circulate there, if there
was no paper money. If twenty shilling notes, for example, are
the lowest paper money current in Scotland, the whole of that
currency which can easily circulate there cannot exceed the sum
of gold and silver which would be necessary for transacting the
annual exchanges of twenty shillings value and upwards usually
transacted within that country. Should the circulating paper at
any time exceed that sum, as the excess could neither be sent
abroad nor be employed in the circulation of the country, it must
immediately return upon the banks to be exchanged for gold and
silver. Many people would immediately perceive that they had more
of this paper than was necessary for transacting their business
at home, and as they could not send it abroad, they would
immediately demand payment of it from the banks. When this
superfluous paper was converted into gold and silver, they could
easily find a use for it by sending it abroad; but they could
find none while it remained in the shape of paper. There would
immediately, therefore, be a run upon the banks to the whole
extent of this superfluous paper, and, if they showed any
difficulty or backwardness in payment, to a much greater extent;
the alarm which this would occasion necessarily increasing the
run.
     Over and above the expenses which are common to every branch
of trade; such as the expense of house-rent, the wages of
servants, clerks, accountants, etc.; the expenses peculiar to a
bank consist chiefly in two articles: first, in the expense of
keeping at all times in its coffers, for answering the occasional
demands of the holders of its notes, a large sum of money, of
which it loses the interest; and, secondly, in the expense of
replenishing those coffers as fast as they are emptied by
answering such occasional demands.
     A banking company, which issues more paper than can be
employed in the circulation of the country, and of which the
excess is continually returning upon them for payment, ought to
increase the quantity of gold and silver, which they keep at all
times in their coffers, not only in proportion to this excessive
increase of their circulation, but in a much greater proportion;
their notes returning upon them much faster than in proportion to
the excess of their quantity. Such a company, therefore, ought to
increase the first article of their expense, not only in
proportion to this forced increase of their business, but in a
much greater proportion.
     The coffers of such a company too, though they ought to be
filled much fuller, yet must empty themselves much faster than if
their business was confined within more reasonable bounds, and
must require, not only a more violent, but a more constant and
uninterrupted exertion of expense in order to replenish them. The
coin too, which is thus continually drawn in such large
quantities from their coffers, cannot be employed in the
circulation of the country. It comes in place of a paper which is
over and above what can be employed in that circulation, and is
therefore over and above what can be employed in it too. But as
that coin will not be allowed to lie idle, it must, in one shape
or another, be sent abroad, in order to find that profitable
employment which it cannot find at home; and this continual
exportation of gold and silver, by enhancing the difficulty, must
necessarily enhance still further the expense of the bank, in
finding new gold and silver in order to replenish those coffers,
which empty themselves so very rapidly. Such a company,
therefore, must, in proportion to this forced increase of their
business, increase the second article of their expense still more
than the first.
     Let us suppose that all the paper of a particular bank,
which the circulation of the country can easily absorb and
employ, amounts exactly to forty thousand pounds; and that for
answering occasional demands, this bank is obliged to keep at all
times in its coffers ten thousand pounds in gold and silver.
Should this bank attempt to circulate forty-four thousand pounds,
the four thousand pounds which are over and above what the
circulation can easily absorb and employ, will return upon it
almost as fast as they are issued. For answering occasional
demands, therefore, this bank ought to keep at all times in its
coffers, not eleven thousand pounds only, but fourteen thousand
pounds. It will thus gain nothing by the interest of the four
thousand pounds' excessive circulation; and it will lose the
whole expense of continually collecting four thousand pounds in
gold and silver, which will be continually going out of its
coffers as fast as they are brought into them.
     Had every particular banking company always understood and
attended to its own particular interest, the circulation never
could have been overstocked with paper money. But every
particular banking company has not always understood or attended
to its own particular interest, and the circulation has
frequently been overstocked with paper money.
     By issuing too great a quantity of paper, of which the
excess was continually returning, in order to be exchanged for
gold and silver, the Bank of England was for many years together
obliged to coin gold to the extent of between eight hundred
thousand pounds and a million a year; or at an average, about
eight hundred and fifty thousand pounds. For this great coinage
the bank (in consequence of the worn and degraded state into
which the gold coin had fallen a few years ago) was frequently
obliged to purchase gold bullion at the high price of four pounds
an ounce, which it soon after issued in coin at 53 17s. 10 1/2d.
an ounce, losing in this manner between two and a half and three
per cent upon the coinage of so very large a sum. Though the bank
therefore paid no seignorage, though the government was properly
at the expense of the coinage, this liberality of government did
not prevent altogether the expense of the bank.
     The Scotch banks, in consequence of an excess of the same
kind, were all obliged to employ constantly agents at London to
collect money for them, at an expense which was seldom below one
and a half or two per cent. This money was sent down by the
waggon, and insured by the carriers at an additional expense of
three quarters per cent or fifteen shillings on the hundred
pounds. Those agents were not always able to replenish the
coffers of their employers so fast as they were emptied. In this
case the resource of the banks was to draw upon their
correspondents in London bills of exchange to the extent of the
sum which they wanted. When those correspondents afterwards drew
upon them for the payment of this sum, together with the interest
and a commission, sonic of those banks, from the distress into
which their excessive circulation had thrown them, had sometimes
no other means of satisfying this draught but by drawing a second
set of bills either upon the same, or upon some other
correspondents in London; and the same sum, or rather bills for
the same sum, would in this manner make sometimes more than two
or three journeys, the debtor, bank, paying always the interest
and commission upon the whole accumulated sum. Even those Scotch
banks which never distinguished themselves by their extreme
imprudence, were sometimes obliged to employ this ruinous
resource.
     The gold coin which was paid out either by the Bank of
England, or by the Scotch banks, in exchange for that part of
their paper which was over and above what could be employed in
the circulation of the country, being likewise over and above
what could be employed in that circulation, was sometimes sent
abroad in the shape of coin, sometimes melted down and sent
abroad in the shape of bullion, and sometimes melted down and
sold to the Bank of England at the high price of four pounds an
ounce. It was the newest, the heaviest, and the best pieces only
which were carefully picked out of the whole coin, and either
sent abroad or melted down. At home, and while they remained in
the shape of coin, those heavy pieces were of no more value than
the light. But they were of more value abroad, or when melted
down into bullion, at home. The Bank of England, notwithstanding
their great annual coinage, found to their astonishment that
there was every year the same scarcity of coin as there had been
the year before; and that notwithstanding the great quantity of
good and new coin which was every year issued from the bank, the
state of the coin, instead of growing better and better, became
every year worse and worse. Every year they found themselves
under the necessity of coining nearly the same quantity of gold
as they had coined the year before, and from the continual rise
in the price of gold bullion, in consequence of the continual
wearing and clipping of the coin, the expense of this great
annual coinage became every year greater and greater. The Bank of
England, it is to be observed, by supplying its own coffers with
coin, is indirectly obliged to supply the whole kingdom, into
which coin is continually flowing from those coffers in a great
variety of ways. Whatever coin therefore was wanted to support
this excessive circulation both of Scotch and English paper
money, whatever vacuities this excessive circulation occasioned
in the necessary coin of the kingdom, the Bank of England was
obliged to supply them. The Scotch banks, no doubt, paid all of
them very dearly for their own imprudence and inattention. But
the Bank of England paid very dearly, not only for its own
imprudence, but for the much greater imprudence of almost all the
Scotch banks.
     The overtrading of some bold projectors in both parts of the
United Kingdom was the original cause of this excessive
circulation of paper money.
     What a bank can with propriety advance to a merchant or
undertaker of any kind, is not either the whole capital with
which he trades, or even any considerable part of that capital;
but that part of it only which he would otherwise be obliged to
keep by him unemployed, and in ready money for answering
occasional demands. If the paper money which the bank advances
never exceeds this value, it can never exceed the value of the
gold and silver which would necessarily circulate in the country
if there was no paper money; it can never exceed the quantity
which the circulation of the country can easily absorb and
employ.
     When a bank discounts to a merchant a real bill of exchange
drawn by a real creditor upon a real debtor, and which, as soon
as it becomes due, is really paid by that debtor, it only
advances to him a part of the value which he would otherwise be
obliged to keep by him unemployed and in ready money for
answering occasional demands. The payment of the bill, when it
becomes due, replaces to the bank the value of what it had
advanced, together with the interest. The coffers of the bank, so
far as its dealings are confined to such customers, resemble a
water pond, from which, though a stream is continually running
out, yet another is continually running in, fully equal to that
which runs out; so that, without any further care or attention,
the pond keeps always equally, or very near equally full. Little
or no expense can ever be necessary for replenishing the coffers
of such a bank.
     A merchant, without overtrading, may frequently have
occasion for a sum of ready money, even when he has no bills to
discount. When a bank, besides discounting his bills, advances
him likewise upon such occasions such sums upon his cash account,
and accepts of a piecemeal repayment as the money comes in from
the occasional sale of his goods, upon the easy terms of the
banking companies of Scotland; it dispenses him entirely from the
necessity of keeping any part of his stock by him unemployed and
in ready money for answering occasional demands. When such
demands actually come upon him, he can answer them sufficiently
from his cash account. The bank, however, in dealing with such
customers, ought to observe with great attention, whether in the
course of some short period (of four, five, six, or eight months
for example) the sum of the repayments which it commonly receives
from them is, or is not, fully equal to that of the advances
which it commonly makes to them. If, within the course of such
short periods, the sum of the repayments from certain customers
is, upon most occasions, fully equal to that of the advances, it
may safely continue to deal with such customers. Though the
stream which is in this case continually running out from its
coffers may be very large, that which is continually running into
them must be at least equally large; so that without any further
care or attention those coffers are likely to be always equally
or very near equally full; and scarce ever to require any
extraordinary expense to replenish them. If, on the contrary, the
sum of the repayments from certain other customers falls commonly
very much short of the advances which it makes to them, it cannot
with any safety continue to deal with such customers, at least if
they continue to deal with it in this manner. The stream which is
in this case continually running out from its coffers is
necessarily much larger than that which is continually running
in; so that, unless they are replenished by some great and
continual effort of expense, those coffers must soon be exhausted
altogether.
     The banking companies of Scotland, accordingly, were for a
long time very careful to require frequent and regular repayments
from all their customers, and did not care to deal with any
person, whatever might be his fortune or credit, who did not
make, what they called, frequent and regular operations with
them. By this attention, besides saving almost entirely the
extraordinary expense of replenishing their coffers, they gained
two other very considerable advantages.
     First, by this attention they were enabled to make some
tolerable judgment concerning the thriving or declining
circumstances of their debtors, without being obliged to look out
for any other evidence besides what their own books afforded
them; men being for the most part either regular or irregular in
their repayments, according as their circumstances are either
thriving or declining. A private man who lends out his money to
perhaps half a dozen or a dozen of debtors, may, either by
himself or his agents, observe and inquire both constantly and
carefully into the conduct and situation of each of them. But a
banking company, which lends money to perhaps five hundred
different people, and of which the attention is continually
occupied by objects of a very different kind, can have no regular
information concerning the conduct and circumstances of the
greater part of its debtors beyond what its own books afford it.
In requiring frequent and regular repayments from all their
customers, the banking companies of Scotland had probably this
advantage in view.
     Secondly, by this attention they secured themselves from the
possibility of issuing more paper money than what the circulation
of the country could easily absorb and employ. When they observed
that within moderate periods of time the repayments of a
particular customer were upon most occasions fully equal to the
advances which they had made to him, they might be assured that
the paper money which they had advanced to him had not at any
time exceeded the quantity of gold and silver which he would
otherwise have been obliged to keep by him for answering
occasional demands; and that, consequently, the paper money,
which they had circulated by his means, had not at any time
exceeded the quantity of gold and silver which would have
circulated in the country had there been no paper money. The
frequency, regularity, and amount of his repayments would
sufficiently demonstrate that the amount of their advances had at
no time exceeded that part of his capital which he would
otherwise have been obliged to keep by him unemployed and in
ready money for answering occasional demands; that is, for the
purpose of keeping the rest of his capital in constant
employment. It is this part of his capital only which, within
moderate periods of time, is continually returning to every
dealer in the shape of money, whether paper or coin, and
continually going from him in the same shape. If the advances of
the bank had commonly exceeded this part of his capital, the
ordinary amount of his repayments could not, within moderate
periods of time, have equalled the ordinary amount of its
advances. The stream which, by means of his dealings, was
continually running into the coffers of the bank, could not have
been equal to the stream which, by means of the same dealings,
was continually running out. The advances of the bank paper, by
exceeding the quantity of gold and silver which, had there been
no such advances, he would have been obliged to keep by him for
answering occasional demands, might soon come to exceed the whole
quantity of gold and silver which (the commerce being supposed
the same) would have circulated in the country had there been no
paper money; and consequently to exceed the quantity which the
circulation of the country could easily absorb and employ; and
the excess of this paper money would immediately have returned
upon the bank in order to be exchanged for gold and silver. This
second advantage, though equally real, was not perhaps so well
understood by all the different banking companies of Scotland as
the first.
     When, partly by the conveniency of discounting bills, and
partly by that of cash accounts, the creditable traders of any
country can be dispensed from the necessity of keeping any part
of their stock by them unemployed and in ready money for
answering occasional demands, they can reasonably expect no
farther assistance from banks and bankers, who, when they have
gone thus far, cannot, consistently with their own interest and
safety, go farther. A bank cannot, consistently with its own
interest, advance to a trader the whole or even the greater part
of the circulating capital with which he trades; because, though
that capital is continually returning to him in the shape of
money, and going from him in the same shape, yet the whole of the
returns is too distant from the whole of the outgoings, and the
sum of his repayments could not equal the sum of its advances
within such moderate periods of time as suit the conveniency of a
bank. Still less, could a bank afford to advance him any
considerable part of his fixed capital; of the capital which the
undertaker of an iron forge, for example, employs in erecting his
forge and smelting-house, his workhouses and warehouses, the
dwelling-houses of his workmen, etc.; of the capital which the
undertaker of a mine employs in sinking his shafts, in erecting
engines for drawing out the water, in making roads and
waggon-ways, etc.; of the capital which the person who undertakes
to improve land employs in clearing, draining, enclosing,
manuring, and ploughing waste and uncultivated fields, in
building farm-houses, with all their necessary appendages of
stables, granaries, etc. The returns of the fixed capital are in
almost all cases much slower than those of the circulating
capital; and such expenses, even when laid out with the greatest
prudence and judgment, very seldom return to the undertaker till
after a period of many years, a period by far too distant to suit
the conveniency of a bank. Traders and other undertakers may, no
doubt, with great propriety, carry on a very considerable part of
their projects with borrowed money. In justice to their
creditors, however, their own capital ought, in this case, to be
sufficient to ensure, if I may say so, the capital of those
creditors; or to render it extremely improbable that those
creditors should incur any loss, even though the success of the
project should fall very much short of the expectation of the
projectors. Even with this precaution too, the money which is
borrowed, and which it is meant should not be repaid till after a
period of several years, ought not to be borrowed of a bank, but
ought to be borrowed upon bond or mortgage of such private people
as propose to live upon the interest of their money without
taking the trouble themselves to employ the capital, and who are
upon that account willing to lend that capital to such people of
good credit as are likely to keep it for several years. A bank,
indeed, which lends its money without the expense of stamped
paper, or of attorneys' fees for drawing bonds and mortgages, and
which accepts of repayment upon the easy terms of the banking
companies of Scotland, would, no doubt, be a very convenient
creditor to such traders and undertakers. But such traders and
undertakers would, surely, be most inconvenient debtors to such a
bank.
     It is now more than five-and-twenty years since the paper
money issued by the different banking companies of Scotland was
fully equal, or rather was somewhat more than fully equal, to
what the circulation of the country could easily absorb and
employ. Those companies, therefore, had so long ago given all the
assistance to the traders and other undertakers of Scotland which
it is possible for banks and bankers, consistently with their own
interest, to give. They had even done somewhat more. They had
overtraded a little, and had brought upon themselves that loss,
or at least that diminution of profit, which in this particular
business never fails to attend the smallest degree of
overtrading. Those traders and other undertakers, having got so
much assistance from banks and bankers, wished to get still more.
The banks, they seem to have thought, could extend their credits
to whatever sum might be wanted, without incurring any other
expense besides that of a few reams of paper. They complained of
the contracted views and dastardly spirit of the directors of
those banks, which did not, they said, extend their credits in
proportion to the extension of the trade of the country; meaning,
no doubt, by the extension of that trade the extension of their
own projects beyond what they could carry on, either with their
own capital, or with what they had credit to borrow of private
people in the usual way of bond or mortgage. The banks, they seem
to have thought, were in honour bound to supply the deficiency,
and to provide them with all the capital which they wanted to
trade with. The banks, however, were of a different opinion, and
upon their refusing to extend their credits, some of those
traders had recourse to an expedient which, for a time, served
their purpose, though at a much greater expense, yet as
effectually as the utmost extension of bank credits could have
done. This expedient was no other than the well-known shift of
drawing and redrawing; the shift to which unfortunate traders
have sometimes recourse when they are upon the brink of
bankruptcy. The practice of raising money in this manner had been
long known in England, and during the course of the late war,
when the high profits of trade afforded a great temptation to
overtrading, is said to have carried on to a very great extent.
From England it was brought into Scotland, where, in proportion
to the very limited commerce, and to the very moderate capital of
the country, it was soon carried on to a much greater extent than
it ever had been in England.
     The practice of drawing and redrawing is so well known to
all men of business that it may perhaps be thought unnecessary to
give an account of it. But as this book may come into the hands
of many people who are not men of business, and as the effects of
this practice upon the banking trade are not perhaps generally
understood even by men of business themselves, I shall endeavour
to explain it as distinctly as I can.
     The customs of merchants, which were established when the
barbarous laws of Europe did not enforce the performance of their
contracts, and which during the course of the two last centuries
have been adopted into the laws of all European nations, have
given such extraordinary privileges to bills of exchange that
money is more readily advanced upon them than upon any other
species of obligation, especially when they are made payable
within so short a period as two or three months after their date.
If, when the bill becomes due, the acceptor does not pay it as
soon as it is presented, he becomes from that moment a bankrupt.
The bill is protested, and returns upon the drawer, who, if he
does not immediately pay it, becomes likewise a bankrupt. If,
before it came to the person who presents it to the acceptor for
payment, it had passed through the hands of several other
persons, who had successively advanced to one another the
contents of it either in money or goods, and who to express that
each of them had in his turn received those contents, had all of
them in their order endorsed, that is, written their names upon
the back of the bill; each endorser becomes in his turn liable to
the owner of the bill for those contents, and, if he fails to
pay, he becomes too from that moment a bankrupt. Though the
drawer, acceptor, and endorsers of the bill should, all of them,
be persons of doubtful credit; yet still the shortness of the
date gives some security to the owner of the bill. Though all of
them may be very likely to become bankrupts, it is a chance if
they all become so in so short a time. The house is crazy, says a
weary traveller to himself, and will not stand very long; but it
is a chance if it falls to-night, and I will venture, therefore,
to sleep in it to-night.
     The trader A in Edinburgh, we shall suppose, draws a bill
upon B in London, payable two months after date. In reality B in
London owes nothing to A in Edinburgh; but he agrees to accept of
A's bill, upon condition that before the term of payment he shall
redraw upon A in Edinburgh for the same sum, together with the
interest and a commission, another bill, payable likewise two
months after date. B accordingly, before the expiration of the
first two months, redraws this bill upon A in Edinburgh; who
again, before the expiration of the second two months, draws a
second bill upon B in London, payable likewise two months after
date; and before the expiration of the third two months, B in
London redraws upon A in Edinburgh another bill, payable also two
months after date. This practice has sometimes gone on, not only
for several months, but for several years together, the bill
always returning upon A in Edinburgh, with the accumulated
interest and commission of all the former bills. The interest was
five per cent in the year, and the commission was never less than
one half per cent on each draft. This commission being repeated
more than six times in the year, whatever money A might raise by
this expedient must necessarily have, cost him something more
than eight per cent in the year, and sometimes a great deal more;
when either the price of the commission happened to rise, or when
he was obliged to pay compound interest upon the interest and
commission of former bills. This practice was called raising
money by circulation.
     In a country where the ordinary profits of stock in the
greater part of mercantile projects are supposed to run between
six and ten per cent, it must have been a very fortunate
speculation of which the returns could not only repay the
enormous expense at which the money was thus borrowed for
carrying it on; but afford, besides, a good surplus profit to the
projector. Many vast and extensive projects, however, were
undertaken, and for several years carried on without any other
fund to support them besides what was raised at this enormous
expense. The projectors, no doubt, had in their golden dreams the
most distinct vision of this great profit. Upon their awaking,
however, either at the end of their projects, or when they were
no longer able to carry them on, they very seldom, I believe, had
the good fortune to find it.
     The bills A in Edinburgh drew upon B in London, he regularly
discounted two months before they were due with some bank or
banker in Edinburgh; and the bills which B in London redrew upon
A in Edinburgh, he as regularly discounted either with the Bank
of England, or with some other bankers in London. Whatever was
advanced upon such circulating bills, was, in Edinburgh, advanced
in the paper of the Scotch banks, and in London, when they were
discounted at the Bank of England, in the paper of that bank.
Though the bills upon which this paper had been advanced were all
of them repaid in their turn as soon as they became due; yet the
value which had been really advanced upon the first bill, was
never really returned to the banks which advanced it; because,
before each bill became due, another bill was always drawn to
somewhat a greater amount than the bill which was soon to be
paid; and the discounting of this other bill was essentially
necessary towards the payment of that which was soon to be due.
This payment, therefore, was altogether fictitious. The stream,
which, by means of those circulating bills of exchange, had once
been made to run out from the coffers of the banks, was never
replaced by any stream which really run into them.
     The paper which was issued upon those circulating bills of
exchange, amounted, upon many occasions, to the whole fund
destined for carrying on some vast and extensive project of
agriculture, commerce, or manufactures; and not merely to that
part of it which, had there been no paper money, the projector
would have been obliged to keep by him, unemployed and in ready
money for answering occasional demands. The greater part of this
paper was, consequently, over and above the value of the gold and
silver which would have circulated in the country, had there been
no paper money. It was over and above, therefore, what the
circulation of the country could easily absorb and employ, and
upon that account, immediately returned upon the banks in order
to be exchanged for gold and silver, which they were to find as
they could. It was a capital which those projectors had very
artfully contrived to draw from those banks, not only without
their knowledge or deliberate consent, but for some time,
perhaps, without their having the most distant suspicion that
they had really advanced it.
     When two people, who are continually drawing and redrawing
upon one another, discount their bills always with the same
banker, he must immediately discover what they are about, and see
clearly that they are trading, not with any capital of their own,
but with the capital which he advances to them. But this
discovery is not altogether so easy when they discount their
bills sometimes with one banker, and sometimes with another, and
when the same two persons do not constantly draw and redraw upon
one another, but occasionally run the round of a great circle of
projectors, who find it for their interest to assist one another
in this method of raising money, and to render it, upon that
account, as difficult as possible to distinguish between a real
and fictitious bill of exchange; between a bill drawn by a real
creditor upon a real debtor, and a bill for which there was
properly no real creditor but the bank which discounted it, nor
any real debtor but the projector who made use of the money. When
a banker had even made this discovery, he might sometimes make it
too late, and might find that he had already discounted the bills
of those projectors to so great an extent that, by refusing to
discount any more, he would necessarily make them all bankrupts,
and thus, by ruining them, might perhaps ruin himself. For his
own interest and safety, therefore, he might find it necessary,
in this very perilous situation, to go on for some time,
endeavouring, however, to withdraw gradually, and upon that
account making every day greater and greater difficulties about
discounting, in order to force those projectors by degrees to
have recourse, either to other bankers, or to other methods of
raising money; so that he himself might, as soon as possible, get
out of the circle. The difficulties, accordingly, which the Bank
of England, which the principal bankers in London, and which even
the more prudent Scotch banks began, after a certain time, and
when all of them had already gone too far, to make about
discounting, not only alarmed, but enraged in the highest degree
those projectors. Their own distress, of which this prudent and
necessary reserve of the banks was, no doubt, the immediate
occasion, they called the distress of the country; and this
distress of the country, they said, was altogether owing to the
ignorance, pusillanimity, and bad conduct of the banks, which did
not give a sufficiently liberal aid to the spirited undertakings
of those who exerted themselves in order to beautify, improve,
and enrich the country. It was the duty of the banks, they seemed
to think, to lend for as long a time, and to as great an extent
as they might wish to borrow. The banks, however, by refusing in
this manner to give more credit to those to whom they had already
given a great deal too much, took the only method by which it was
now possible to save either their own credit or the public credit
of the country.
     In the midst of this clamour and distress, a new bank was
established in Scotland for the express purpose of relieving the
distress of the country. The design was generous; but the
execution was imprudent, and the nature and causes of the
distress which it meant to relieve were not, perhaps, well
understood. This bank was more liberal than any other had ever
been, both in granting cash accounts, and in discounting bills of
exchange. With regard to the latter, it seems to have made scarce
any distinction between real and circulating bills, but to have
discounted all equally. It was the avowed principle of this bank
to advance, upon any reasonable security, the whole capital which
was to be employed in those improvements of which the returns are
the most slow and distant, such as the improvements of land. To
promote such improvements was even said to be the chief of the
public-spirited purposes for which it was instituted. By its
liberality in granting cash accounts, and in discounting bills of
exchange, it, no doubt, issued great quantities of its bank
notes. But those bank notes being, the greater part of them, over
and above what the circulation of the country could easily absorb
and employ, returned upon it, in order to be exchanged for gold
and silver as fast as they were issued. Its coffers were never
well filled. The capital which had been subscribed to this bank
at two different subscriptions, amounted to one hundred and sixty
thousand pounds, of which eighty per cent only was paid up. This
sum ought to have been paid in at several different instalments.
A great part of the proprietors, when they paid in their first
instalment, opened a cash account with the bank; and the
directors, thinking themselves obliged to treat their own
proprietors with the same liberality with which they treated all
other men, allowed many of them to borrow upon this cash account
what they paid in upon all their subsequent instalments. Such
payments, therefore, only put into one coffer what had the moment
before been taken out of another. But had the coffers of this
bank been filled ever so well, its excessive circulation must
have emptied them faster than they could have been replenished by
any other expedient but the ruinous one of drawing upon London,
and when the bill became due, paying it, together with interest
and commission, by another draft upon the same place. Its coffers
having been filled so very ill, it is said to have been driven to
this resource within a very few months after it began to do
business. The estates of the proprietors of this bank were worth
several millions, and by their subscription to the original bond
or contract of the bank, were really pledged for answering all
its engagements. By means of the great credit which so great a
pledge necessarily gave it, it was, notwithstanding its too
liberal conduct, enabled to carry on business for more than two
years. When it was obliged to stop, it had in the circulation
about two hundred thousand pounds in bank notes. In order to
support the circulation of those notes which were continually
returning upon it as fast they were issued, it had been
constantly in the practice of drawing bills of exchange upon
London, of which the number and value were continually
increasing, and, when it stopped, amounted to upwards of six
hundred thousand pounds. This bank, therefore, had, in little
more than the course of two years, advanced to different people
upwards of eight hundred thousand pounds at five per cent. Upon
the two hundred thousand pounds which it circulated in bank
notes, this five per cent might, perhaps, be considered as clear
gain, without any other deduction besides the expense of
management. But upon upwards of six hundred thousand pounds, for
which it was continually drawing bills of exchange upon London,
it was paying, in the way of interest and commission, upwards of
eight per cent, and was consequently losing more than three per
cent upon more than three-fourths of all its dealings.
     The operations of this bank seem to have produced effects
quite opposite to those which were intended by the particular
persons who planned and directed it. They seem to have intended
to support the spirited undertakings, for as such they considered
them, which were at that time carrying on in different parts of
the country; and at the same time, by drawing the whole banking
business to themselves, to supplant all the other Scotch banks,
particularly those established in Edinburgh, whose backwardness
in discounting bills of exchange had given some offence. This
bank, no doubt, gave some temporary relief to those projectors,
and enabled them to carry on their projects for about two years
longer than they could otherwise have done. But it thereby only
enabled them to get so much deeper into debt, so that, when ruin
came, it fell so much the heavier both upon them and upon their
creditors. The operations of this bank, therefore, instead of
relieving, in reality aggravated in the long-run the distress
which those projectors had brought both upon themselves and upon
their country. It would have been much better for themselves,
their creditors, and their country, had the greater part of them
been obliged to stop two years sooner than they actually did. The
temporary relief, however, which this bank afforded to those
projectors, proved a real and permanent relief to the other
Scotch banks. All the dealers in circulating bills of exchange,
which those other banks had become so backward in discounting,
had recourse to this new bank, where they were received with open
arms. Those other banks, therefore, were enabled to get very
easily out of that fatal circle, from which they could not
otherwise have disengaged themselves without incurring a
considerable loss, and perhaps too even some degree of discredit.
     In the long-run, therefore, the operations of this bank
increased the real distress of the country which it meant to
relieve; and effectually relieved from a very great distress
those rivals whom it meant to supplant.
     At the first setting out of this bank, it was the opinion of
some people that how fast soever its coffers might be emptied, it
might easily replenish them by raising money upon the securities
of those to whom it had advanced its paper. Experience, I
believe, soon convinced them that this method of raising money
was by much too slow to answer their purpose; and that coffers
which originally were so ill filled, and which emptied themselves
so very fast, could be replenished by no other expedient but the
ruinous one of drawing bills upon London, and when they became
due, paying them by other drafts upon the same place with
accumulated interest and commission. But though they had been
able by this method to raise money as fast as they wanted it,
yet, instead of making a profit, they must have suffered a loss
by every such operation; so that in the long-run they must have
ruined themselves as a mercantile company, though, perhaps, not
so soon as by the more expensive practice of drawing and
redrawing. They could still have made nothing by the interest of
the paper, which, being over and above what the circulation of
the country could absorb and employ, returned upon them, in order
to be exchanged for gold and silver, as fast as they issued it;
and for the payment of which they were themselves continually
obliged to borrow money. On the contrary, the whole expense of
this borrowing, of employing agents to look out for people who
had money to lend, of negotiating with those people, and of
drawing the proper bond or assignment, must have fallen upon
them, and have been so much clear loss upon the balance of their
accounts. The project of replenishing their coffers in this
manner may be compared to that of a man who had a water-pond from
which a stream was continually running out, and into which no
stream was continually running, but who proposed to keep it
always equally full by employing a number of people to go
continually with buckets to a well at some miles distance in
order to bring water to replenish it.
     But though this operation had proved not only practicable
but profitable to the bank as a mercantile company, yet the
country could have derived no benefit from it; but, on the
contrary, must have suffered a very considerable loss by it. This
operation could not augment in the smallest degree the quantity
of money to be lent. It could only have erected this bank into a
sort of general loan office for the whole country. Those who
wanted to borrow must have applied to this bank instead of
applying to the private persons who had lent it their money. But
a bank which lends money perhaps to five hundred different
people, the greater part of whom its directors can know very
little about, is not likely to be more judicious in the choice of
its debtors than a private person who lends out his money among a
few people whom he knows, and in whose sober and frugal conduct
he thinks he has good reason to confide. The debtors of such a
bank as that whose conduct I have been giving some account of
were likely, the greater part of them, to be chimerical
projectors, the drawers and re-drawers of circulating bills of
exchange, who would employ the money in extravagant undertakings,
which, with all the assistance that could be given them, they
would probably never be able to complete, and which, if they
should be completed, would never repay the expense which they had
really cost, would never afford a fund capable of maintaining a
quantity of labour equal to that which had been employed about
them. The sober and frugal debtors of private persons, on the
contrary, would be more likely to employ the money borrowed in
sober undertakings which were proportioned to their capitals, and
which, though they might have less of the grand and the
marvellous, would have more of the solid and the profitable,
which would repay with a large profit whatever had been laid out
upon them, and which would thus afford a fund capable of
maintaining a much greater quantity of labour than that which had
been employed about them. The success of this operation,
therefore, without increasing in the smallest degree the capital
of the country, would only have transferred a great part of it
from prudent and profitable to imprudent and unprofitable
undertakings.
     That the industry of Scotland languished for want of money
to employ it was the opinion of the famous Mr. Law. By
establishing a bank of a particular kind, which he seems to have
imagined might issue paper to the amount of the whole value of
all the lands in the country, he proposed to remedy this want of
money. The Parliament of Scotland, when he first proposed his
project, did not think proper to adopt it. It was afterwards
adopted, with some variations, by the Duke of Orleans, at that
time Regent of France. The idea of the possibility of multiplying
paper to almost any extent was the real foundation of what is
called the Mississippi scheme, the most extravagant project both
of banking and stock-jobbing that, perhaps, the world ever saw.
The different operations of this scheme are explained so fully,
so clearly, and with so much order and distinctness, by Mr. du
Verney, in his Examination of the Political Reflections upon
Commerce and Finances of Mr. du Tot, that I shall not give any
account of them. The principles upon which it was founded are
explained by Mr. Law himself, in a discourse concerning money and
trade, which he published in Scotland when he first proposed his
project. The splendid but visionary ideas which are set forth in
that and some other works upon the same principles still continue
to make an impression upon many people, and have, perhaps, in
part, contributed to that excess of banking which has of late
been complained of both in Scotland and in other places.
     The Bank of England is the greatest bank of circulation in
Europe. It was incorporated, in pursuance of an act of
Parliament, by a charter under the Great Seal, dated the 27th of
July, 1694. It at that time advanced to government the sum of one
million two hundred thousand pounds, for an annuity of one
hundred thousand pounds; or for L96,000 a year interest, at the
rate of eight per cent, and L4000 a year for the expense of
management. The credit of the new government, established by the
Revolution, we may believe, must have been very low, when it was
obliged to borrow at so high an interest.
     In 1697 the bank was allowed to enlarge its capital stock by
an engraftment of L1,001,171 10s. Its whole capital stock
therefore, amounted at this time to L2,201,171 10s. This
engraftment is said to have been for the support of public
credit. In 1696, tallies had been at forty, and fifty, and sixty
per cent discount, and bank notes at twenty per cent. During the
great recoinage of the silver, which was going on at this time,
the bank had thought proper to discontinue the payment of its
notes, which necessarily occasioned their discredit.
     In pursuance of the 7th Anne, c. 7, the bank advanced and
paid into the exchequer the sum of L400,000; making in all the
sum of L1,600,000 which it had advanced upon its original annuity
of L96,000 interest and L4000 for expense of management. In 1708,
therefore, the credit of government was as good as that of
private persons, since it could borrow at six per cent interest
the common legal and market rate of those times. In pursuance of
the same act, the bank cancelled exchequer bills to the amount of
L1,775,027 17s. 10 1/2d. at six per cent interest, and was at the
same time allowed to take in subscriptions for doubling its
capital. In 1708, therefore, the capital of the bank amounted to
L4,402,343; and it had advanced to government the sum of
L3,375,027 17s. 10 1/2d.
     By a call of fifteen per cent in 1709, there was paid in and
made stock L656,204 Is. 9d.; and by another of ten per cent in
1710, L501,448 12s. 11d. In consequence of those two calls,
therefore, the bank capital amounted to L5,559,995 14s. 8d.
     In pursuance of the 3rd George I, c. 8, the bank delivered
up two millions of exchequer bills to be cancelled. It had at
this time, therefore, advanced to government 17s. 10d. In
pursuance of the 8th George 1, c. 21, the bank purchased of the
South Sea Company stock to the amount of 14,000,000; and in 1722,
in consequence of the subscriptions which it had taken in for
enabling it to make this purchase, its capital stock was
increased by L3,400,000. At this time, therefore, the bank had
advanced to the public L9,375,027 17s. 10 1/2d.; and its capital
stock amounted only to L8,959,995 14s. 8d. It was upon this
occasion that the sum which the bank had advanced to the public,
and for which it received interest, began first to exceed its
capital stock, or the sum for which it paid a dividend to the
proprietors of bank stock; or, in other words, that the bank
began to have an undivided capital, over and above its divided
one. It has continued to have an undivided capital of the same
kind ever since. In 1746, the bank had, upon different occasions,
advanced to the public L11,686,800 and its divided capital had
been raised by different calls and subscriptions to L10,780,000.
The state of those two sums has continued to be the same ever
since. In pursuance of the 4th of George III, c. 25, the bank
agreed to pay to government for the renewal of its charter
L110,000 without interest or repayment. This sum, therefore, did
not increase either of those two other sums.
     The dividend of the bank has varied according to the
variations in the rate of the interest which it has, at different
times, received for the money it had advanced to the public, as
well as according to other circumstances. This rate of interest
has gradually been reduced from eight to three per cent. For some
years past the bank dividend has been at five and a half per
cent.
     The stability of the Bank of England is equal to that of the
British government. All that it has advanced to the public must
be lost before its creditors can sustain any loss. No other
banking company in England can be established by act of
Parliament, or can consist of more than six members. It acts, not
only as an ordinary bank, but as a great engine of state. It
receives and pays the greater part of the annuities which are due
to the creditors of the public, it circulates exchequer bills,
and it advances to government the annual amount of the land and
malt taxes, which are frequently not paid up till some years
thereafter. In those different operations, its duty to the public
may sometimes have obliged it, without any fault of its
directors, to overstock the circulation with paper money. It
likewise discounts merchants' bills, and has, upon several
different occasions, supported the credit of the principal
houses, not only of England, but of Hamburg and Holland. Upon one
occasion, in 1763, it is said to have advanced for this purpose,
in one week, about L1,600,000, a great part of it in bullion. I
do not, however, pretend to warrant either the greatness of the
sum, or the shortness of the time. Upon other occasions, this
great company has been reduced to the necessity of paying in
sixpences.
     It is not by augmenting the capital of the country, but by
rendering a greater part of that capital active and productive
than would otherwise be so, that the most judicious operations of
banking can increase the industry of the country. That part of
his capital which a dealer is obliged to keep by him unemployed,
and in ready money, for answering occasional demands, is so much
dead stock, which, so long as it remains in this situation,
produces nothing either to him or to his country. The judicious
operations of banking enable him to convert this dead stock into
active and productive stock; into materials to work upon, into
tools to work with, and into provisions and subsistence to work
for; into stock which produces something both to himself and to
his country. The gold and silver money which circulates in any
country, and by means of which the produce of its land and labour
is annually circulated and distributed to the proper consumers,
is, in the same manner as the ready money of the dealer, all dead
stock. It is a very valuable part of the capital of the country,
which produces nothing to the country. The judicious operations
of banking, by substituting paper in the room of a great part of
this gold and silver, enables the country to convert a great part
of this dead stock into active and productive stock; into stock
which produces something to the country. The gold and silver
money which circulates in any country may very properly be
compared to a highway, which, while it circulates and carries to
market all the grass and corn of the country, produces itself not
a single pile of either. The judicious operations of banking, by
providing, if I may be allowed so violent a metaphor, a sort of
waggon-way through the air, enable the country to convert, as it
were, a great part of its highways into good pastures and
corn-fields, and thereby to increase very considerably the annual
produce of its land and labour. The commerce and industry of the
country, however, it must be acknowledged, though they may be
somewhat augmented, cannot be altogether so secure when they are
thus, as it were, suspended upon the Daedalian wings of paper
money as when they travel about upon the solid ground of gold and
silver. Over and above the accidents to which they are exposed
from the unskillfulness of the conductors of this paper money,
they are liable to several others, from which no prudence or
skill of those conductors can guard them.
     An unsuccessful war, for example, in which the enemy got
possession of the capital, and consequently of that treasure
which supported the credit of the paper money, would occasion a
much greater confusion in a country where the whole circulation
was carried on by paper, than in one where the greater part of it
was carried on by gold and silver. The usual instrument of
commerce having lost its value, no exchanges could be made but
either by barter or upon credit. All taxes having been usually
paid in paper money, the prince would not have wherewithal either
to pay his troops, or to furnish his magazines; and the state of
the country would be much more irretrievable than if the greater
part of its circulation had consisted in gold and silver. A
prince, anxious to maintain his dominions at all times in the
state in which he can most easily defend them, ought, upon this
account, to guard, not only against that excessive multiplication
of paper money which ruins the very banks which issue it; but
even against that multiplication of it which enables them to fill
the greater part of the circulation of the country with it.
     The circulation of every country may be considered as
divided into two different branches: the circulation of the
dealers with one another, and the circulation between the dealers
and the consumers. Though the same pieces of money, whether paper
or metal, may be employed sometimes in the one circulation and
sometimes in the other, yet as both are constantly going on at
the same time, each requires a certain stock of money of one kind
or another to carry it on. The value of the goods circulated
between the different dealers, never can exceed the value of
those circulated between the dealers and the consumers; whatever
is bought by the dealers, being ultimately destined to be sold to
the consumers. The circulation between the dealers, as it is
carried on by wholesale, requires generally a pretty large sum
for every particular transaction. That between the dealers and
the consumers, on the contrary, as it is generally carried on by
retail, frequently requires but very small ones, a shilling, or
even a halfpenny, being often sufficient. But small sums
circulate much faster than large ones. A shilling changes masters
more frequently than a guinea, and a halfpenny more frequently
than a shilling. Though the annual purchases of all the
consumers, therefore, are at least equal in value to those of all
the dealers, they can generally be transacted with a much smaller
quantity of money; the same pieces, by a more rapid circulation,
serving as the instrument of many more purchases of the one kind
than of the other.
     Paper money may be so regulated as either to confine itself
very much to the circulation between the different dealers, or to
extend itself likewise to a great part of that between the
dealers and the consumers. Where no bank notes are circulated
under ten pounds value, as in London, paper money confines itself
very much to the circulation between the dealers. When a ten
pound bank note comes into the hands of a consumer, he is
generally obliged to change it at the first shop where he has
occasion to purchase five shillings' worth of goods, so that it
often returns into the hands of a dealer before the consumer has
spent the fortieth part of the money. Where bank notes are issued
for so small sums as twenty shillings, as in Scotland, paper
money extends itself to a considerable part of the circulation
between dealers and consumers. Before the Act of Parliament,
which put a stop to the circulation of ten and five shilling
notes, it filled a still greater part of that circulation. In the
currencies of North America, paper was commonly issued for so
small a sum as a shilling, and filled almost the whole of that
circulation. In some paper currencies of Yorkshire, it was issued
even for so small a sum as a sixpence.
     Where the issuing of bank notes for such very small sums is
allowed and commonly practised, many mean people are both enabled
and encouraged to become bankers. A person whose promissory note
for five pounds, or even for twenty shillings, would be rejected
by everybody, will get it to be received without scruple when it
is issued for so small a sum as a sixpence. But the frequent
bankruptcies to which such beggarly bankers must be liable may
occasion a very considerable inconveniency, and sometimes even a
very great calamity to many poor people who had received their
notes in payment.
     It were better, perhaps, that no bank notes were issued in
any part of the kingdom for a smaller sum than five pounds. Paper
money would then, probably, confine itself, in every part of the
kingdom, to the circulation between the different dealers, as
much as it does at present in London, where no bank notes are
issued under ten pounds' value; five pounds being, in most parts
of the kingdom, a sum which, though it will purchase, little more
than half the quantity of goods, is as much considered, and is as
seldom spent all at once, as ten pounds are amidst the profuse
expense of London.
     Where paper money, it is to be observed, is pretty much
confined to the circulation between dealers and dealers, as at
London, there is always plenty of gold and silver. Where it
extends itself to a considerable part of the circulation between
dealers and consumers, as in Scotland, and still more in North
America, it banishes gold and silver almost entirely from the
country; almost all the ordinary transactions of its interior
commerce being thus carried on by paper. The suppression of ten
and five shilling bank notes somewhat relieved the scarcity of
gold and silver in Scotland; and the suppression of twenty
shilling notes would probably relieve it still more. Those metals
are said to have become more abundant in America since the
suppression of some of their paper currencies. They are said,
likewise, to have been more abundant before the institution of
those currencies.
     Though paper money should be pretty much confined to the
circulation between dealers and dealers, yet banks and bankers
might still be able to give nearly the same assistance to the
industry and commerce of the country as they had done when paper
money filled almost the whole circulation. The ready money which
a dealer is obliged to keep by him, for answering occasional
demands, is destined altogether for the circulation between
himself and other dealers of whom he buys goods. He has no
occasion to keep any by him for the circulation between himself
and the consumers, who are his customers, and who bring ready
money to him, instead of taking any from him. Though no paper
money, therefore, was allowed to be issued but for such sums as
would confine it pretty much to the circulation between dealers
and dealers, yet, partly by discounting real bills of exchange,
and partly by lending upon cash accounts, banks and bankers might
still be able to relieve the greater part of those dealers from
the necessity of keeping any considerable part of their stock by
them, unemployed and in ready money, for answering occasional
demands. They might still be able to give the utmost assistance
which banks and bankers can, with propriety, give to traders of
every kind.
     To restrain private people, it may be said, from receiving
in payment the promissory notes of a banker, for any sum whether
great or small, when they themselves are willing to receive them,
or to restrain a banker from issuing such notes, when all his
neighbours are willing to accept of them, is a manifest violation
of that natural liberty which it is the proper business of law
not to infringe, but to support. Such regulations may, no doubt,
be considered as in some respects a violation of natural liberty.
But those exertions of the natural liberty of a few individuals,
which might endanger the security of the whole society, are, and
ought to be, restrained by the laws of all governments, of the
most free as well as of the most despotical. The obligation of
building party walls, in order to prevent the communication of
fire, is a violation of natural liberty exactly of the same kind
with the regulations of the banking trade which are here
proposed.
     A paper money consisting in bank notes, issued by people of
undoubted credit, payable upon demand without any condition, and
in fact always readily paid as soon as presented, is, in every
respect, equal in value to gold and silver money; since gold and
silver money can at any time be had for it. Whatever is either
bought or sold for such paper must necessarily be bought or sold
as cheap as it could have been for gold and silver.
     The increase of paper money, it has been said, by augmenting
the quantity, and consequently diminishing the value of the whole
currency, necessarily augments the money price of commodities.
But as the quantity of gold and silver, which is taken from the
currency, is always equal to the quantity of paper which is added
to it, paper money does not necessarily increase the quantity of
the whole currency. From the beginning of the last century to the
present time, provisions never were cheaper in Scotland than in
1759, though, from the circulation of ten and five shilling bank
notes, there was then more paper money in the country than at
present. The proportion between the price of provisions in
Scotland and that in England is the same now as before the great
multiplication of banking companies in Scotland. Corn is, upon
most occasions, fully as cheap in England as in France; though
there is a great deal of paper money in England, and scarce any
in France. In 1751 and in 1752, when Mr. Hume published his
Political Discourses, and soon after the great multiplication of
paper money in Scotland, there was a very sensible rise in the
price of provisions, owing, probably, to the badness of the
seasons, and not to the multiplication of paper money.
     It would be otherwise, indeed, with a paper money consisting
in promissory notes, of which the immediate payment depended, in
any respect, either upon the good will of those who issued them,
or upon a condition which the holder of the notes might not
always have it in his power to fulfil; or of which the payment
was not exigible till after a certain number of years, and which
in the meantime bore no interest. Such a paper money would, no
doubt, fall more or less below the value of gold and silver,
according as the difficulty or uncertainty of obtaining immediate
payment was supposed to be greater or less; or according to the
greater or less distance of time at which payment was exigible.
     Some years ago the different banking companies of Scotland
were in the practice of inserting into their bank notes, what
they called an Optional Clause, by which they promised payment to
the bearer, either as soon as the note should be presented, or,
in the option of the directors, six months after such
presentment, together with the legal interest for the said six
months. The directors of some of those banks sometimes took
advantage of this optional clause, and sometimes threatened those
who demanded gold and silver in exchange for a considerable
number of their notes that they Would take advantage of it,
unless such demanders would content themselves with a part of
what they demanded. The promissory notes of those banking
companies constituted at that time the far greater part of the
currency of Scotland, which this uncertainty of payment
necessarily degraded below the value of gold and silver money.
During the continuance of this abuse (which prevailed chiefly in
1762, 1763, and 1764), while the exchange between London and
Carlisle was at par, that between London and Dumfries would
sometimes be four per cent against Dumfries, though this town is
not thirty miles distant from Carlisle. But at Carlisle, bills
were paid in gold and silver; whereas at Dumfries they were paid
in Scotch bank notes, and the uncertainty of getting those bank
notes exchanged for gold and silver coin had thus degraded them
four per cent below the value of that coin. The same Act of
Parliament which suppressed ten and five shilling bank notes
suppressed likewise this optional clause, and thereby restored
the exchange between England and Scotland to its natural rate, or
to what the course of trade and remittances might happen to make
it.
     In the paper currencies of Yorkshire, the payment of so
small a sum as a sixpence sometimes depended upon the condition
that the holder of the note should bring the change of a guinea
to the person who issued it; a condition which the holders of
such notes might frequently find it very difficult to fulfil, and
which must have degraded this currency below the value of gold
and silver money. An Act of Parliament accordingly declared all
such clauses unlawful, and suppressed, in the same manner as in
Scotland, all promissory notes, payable to the bearer, under
twenty shillings value.
     The paper currencies of North America consisted, not in bank
notes payable to the bearer on demand, but in government paper,
of which the payment was not exigible till several years after it
was issued; and though the colony governments paid no interest to
the holders of this paper, they declared it to be, and in fact
rendered it, a legal tender of payment for the full value for
which it was issued. But allowing the colony security to be
perfectly good, a hundred pounds payable fifteen years hence, for
example, in a country where interest at six per cent, is worth
little more than forty pounds ready money. To oblige a creditor,
therefore, to accept of this as full payment for a debt of a
hundred pounds actually paid down in ready money was an act of
such violent injustice as has scarce, perhaps, been attempted by
the government of any other country which pretended to be free.
It bears the evident marks of having originally been, what the
honest and downright Doctor Douglas assures us it was, a scheme
of fraudulent debtors to cheat their creditors. The government of
Pennsylvania, indeed, pretended, upon their first emission of
paper money, in 1722, to render their paper of equal value with
gold and silver by enacting penalties against all those who made
any difference in the price of their goods when they sold them
for a colony paper, and when they sold them for gold and silver;
a regulation equally tyrannical, but much less effectual than
that which it was meant to support. A positive law may render a
shilling a legal tender for guinea, because it may direct the
courts of justice to discharge the debtor who has made that
tender. But no positive law can oblige a person who sells goods,
and who is at liberty to sell or not to sell as he pleases, to
accept of a shilling as equivalent to a guinea in the price of
them. Notwithstanding any regulation of this kind, it appeared by
the course of exchange with Great Britain, that a hundred pounds
sterling was occasionally considered as equivalent, in some of
the colonies, to a hundred and thirty pounds, and in others to so
great a sum as eleven hundred pounds currency; this difference in
the value arising from the difference in the quantity of paper
emitted in the different colonies, and in the distance and
probability of the term of its final discharge and redemption.
     No law, therefore, could be more equitable than the Act of
Parliament, so unjustly complained of in the colonies, which
declared that no paper currency to be emitted there in time
coming should be a legal tender of payment.
     Pennsylvania was always more moderate in its emissions of
paper money than any other of our colonies. Its paper currency,
accordingly, is said never to have sunk below the value of the
gold and silver which was current in the colony before the first
emission of its paper money. Before that emission, the colony had
raised the denomination of its coin, and had, by act of assembly,
ordered five shillings sterling to pass in the colony for six and
threepence, and afterwards for six and eightpence. A pound colony
currency, therefore, even when that currency was gold and silver,
was more than thirty per cent below the value of a pound
sterling, and when that currency was turned into paper it was
seldom much more than thirty per cent below that value. The
pretence for raising the denomination of the coin, was to prevent
the exportation of gold and silver, by making equal quantities of
those metals pass for greater sums in the colony than they did in
the mother country. It was found, however, that the price of all
goods from the mother country rose exactly in proportion as they
raised the denomination of their coin, so that their gold and
silver were exported as fast as ever.
     The paper of each colony being received in the payment of
the provincial taxes, for the full value for which it had been
issued, it necessarily derived from this use some additional
value over and above what it would have had from the real or
supposed distance of the term of its final discharge and
redemption. This additional value was greater or less, according
as the quantity of paper issued was more or less above what could
be employed in the payment of the taxes of the particular colony
which issued it. It was in all the colonies very much above what
could be employed in this manner.
     A prince who should enact that a certain proportion of his
taxes should be paid in a paper money of a certain kind might
thereby give a certain value to this paper money, even though the
term of its final discharge and redemption should depend
altogether upon the will of the prince. If the bank which issued
this paper was careful to keep the quantity of it always somewhat
below what could easily be employed in this manner, the demand
for it might be such as to make it even bear a premium, or sell
for somewhat more in the market than the quantity of gold or
silver currency for which it was issued. Some people account in
this manner for what is called the Agio of the bank of Amsterdam,
or for the superiority of bank money over current money; though
this bank money, as they pretend, cannot be taken out of the bank
at the will of the owner. The greater part of foreign bills of
exchange must be paid in bank money, that is, by a transfer in
the books of the bank; and the directors of the bank, they
allege, are careful to keep the whole quantity of bank money
always below what this use occasions a demand for. It is upon
this account, they say, that bank money sells for a premium, or
bears an agio of four or five per cent above the same nominal sum
of the gold and silver currency of the country. This account of
the bank of Amsterdam, however, it will appear hereafter, is in a
great measure chimerical.
     A paper currency which falls below the value of gold and
silver coin does not thereby sink the value of those metals, or
occasion equal quantities of them to exchange for a smaller
quantity of goods of any other kind. The proportion between the
value of gold and silver and that of goods of any other kind
depends in all cases not upon the nature or quantity of any
particular paper money, which may be current in any particular
country, but upon the richness or poverty of the mines, which
happen at any particular time to supply the great market of the
commercial world with those metals. It depends upon the
proportion between the quantity of labour which is necessary in
order to bring a certain quantity of gold and silver to market,
and that which is necessary in order to bring thither a certain
quantity of any other sort of goods.
     If bankers are restrained from issuing any circulating bank
notes, or notes payable to the bearer, for less than a certain
sum, and if they are subjected to the obligation of an immediate
and unconditional payment of such bank notes as soon as
presented, their trade may, with safety to the public, be
rendered in all other respects perfectly free. The late
multiplication of banking companies in both parts of the United
Kingdom, an event by which many people have been much alarmed,
instead of diminishing, increases the security of the public. It
obliges all of them to be more circumspect in their conduct, and,
by not extending their currency beyond its due proportion to
their cash, to guard themselves against those malicious runs
which the rivalship of so many competitors is always ready to
bring upon them. It restrains the circulation of each particular
company within a narrower circle, and reduces their circulating
notes to a smaller number. By dividing the whole circulation into
a greater number of parts, the failure of any one company, an
accident which, in the course of things, must sometimes happen,
becomes of less consequence to the public. This free competition,
too, obliges all bankers to be more liberal in their dealings
with their customers, lest their rivals should carry them away.
In general, if any branch of trade, or any division of labour, be
advantageous to the public, the freer and more general the
competition, it will always be the more so.  

                             CHAPTER III

Of the Accumulation of Capital, or of Productive and Unproductive
Labour 

     THERE is one sort of labour which adds to the value of the
subject upon which it is bestowed: there is another which has no
such effect. The former, as it produces a value, may be called
productive; the latter, unproductive labour. Thus the labour of a
manufacturer adds, generally, to the value of the materials which
he works upon, that of his own maintenance, and of his master's
profit. The labour of a menial servant, on the contrary, adds to
the value of nothing. Though the manufacturer has his wages
advanced to him by his master, he, in reality, costs him no
expense, the value of those wages being generally restored,
together with a profit, in the improved value of the subject upon
which his labour is bestowed. But the maintenance of a menial
servant never is restored. A man grows rich by employing a
multitude of manufacturers: he grows poor by maintaining a
multitude of menial servants. The labour of the latter, however,
has its value, and deserves its reward as well as that of the
former. But the labour of the manufacturer fixes and realizes
itself in some particular subject or vendible commodity, which
lasts for some time at least after that labour is past. It is, as
it were, a certain quantity of labour stocked and stored up to be
employed, if necessary, upon some other occasion. That subject,
or what is the same thing, the price of that subject, can
afterwards, if necessary, put into motion a quantity of labour
equal to that which had originally produced it. The labour of the
menial servant, on the contrary, does not fix or realize itself
in any particular subject or vendible commodity. His services
generally perish in the very instant of their performance, and
seldom leave any trace or value behind them for which an equal
quantity of service could afterwards be procured.
     The labour of some of the most respectable orders in the
society is, like that of menial servants, unproductive of any
value, and does not fix or realize itself in any permanent
subject; or vendible commodity, which endures after that labour
is past, and for which an equal quantity of labour could
afterwards be procured. The sovereign, for example, with all the
officers both of justice and war who serve under him, the whole
army and navy, are unproductive labourers. They are the servants
of the public, and are maintained by a part of the annual produce
of the industry of other people. Their service, how honourable,
how useful, or how necessary soever, produces nothing for which
an equal quantity of service can afterwards be procured. The
protection, security, and defence of the commonwealth, the effect
of their labour this year will not purchase its protection,
security, and defence for the year to come. In the same class
must be ranked, some both of the gravest and most important, and
some of the most frivolous professions: churchmen, lawyers,
physicians, men of letters of all kinds; players, buffoons,
musicians, opera-singers, opera-dancers, etc. The labour of the
meanest of these has a certain value, regulated by the very same
principles which regulate that of every other sort of labour; and
that of the n oblest and most useful, 50 produces nothing which
could afterwards purchase or procure an equal quantity of labour.
Like the declamation of the actor, the harangue of the orator, or
the tune of the musician, the work of all of them perishes in the
very instant of its production.
     Both productive and unproductive labourers, and those who do
not labour at all, are all equally maintained by the annual
produce of the land and labour of the country. This produce, how
great soever, can never be infinite, but must have certain
limits. According, therefore, as a smaller or greater proportion
of it is in any one year employed in maintaining unproductive
hands, the more in the one case and the less in the other will
remain for the productive, and the next year's produce will be
greater or smaller accordingly; the whole annual produce, if we
except the spontaneous productions of the earth, being the effect
of productive labour.
     Though the whole annual produce of the land and labour of
every country is, no doubt, ultimately destined for supplying the
consumption of its inhabitants, and for procuring a revenue to
them, yet when it first comes either from the ground, or from the
hands of the productive labourers, it naturally divides itself
into two parts. One of them, and frequently the largest, is, in
the first place, destined for replacing a capital, or for
renewing the provisions, materials, and finished work, which had
been withdrawn from a capital; the other for constituting a
revenue either to the owner of this capital, as the profit of his
stock, or to some other person, as the rent of his land. Thus, of
the produce of land, one part replaces the capital of the farmer;
the other pays his profit and the rent of the landlord; and thus
constitutes a revenue both to the owner of this capital, as the
profits of his stock; and to some other person, as the rent of
his land. Of the produce of a great manufactory, in the same
manner, one part, and that always the largest, replaces the
capital of the undertaker of the work; the other pays his profit,
and thus constitutes a revenue to the owner of this capital.
     That part of the annual produce of the land and labour of
any country which replaces a capital never is immediately
employed to maintain any but productive hands. It pays the wages
of productive labour only. That which is immediately destined for
constituting a revenue, either as profit or as rent, may maintain
indifferently either productive or unproductive hands.
     Whatever part of his stock a man employs as a capital, he
always expects is to be replaced to him with a profit. He employs
it, therefore, in maintaining productive bands only; and after
having served in the function of a capital to him, it constitutes
a revenue to them. Whenever he employs any part of it in
maintaining unproductive hands of any kind, that part is, from
that moment, withdrawn from his capital, and placed in his stock
reserved for immediate consumption.
     Unproductive labourers, and those who do not labour at all,
are all maintained by revenue; either, first, by that part of the
annual produce which is originally destined for constituting a
revenue to some particular persons, either as the rent of land or
as the profits of stock; or, secondly, by that part which, though
originally destined for replacing a capital and for maintaining
productive labourers only, yet when it comes into their hands
whatever part of it is over and above their necessary subsistence
may be employed in maintaining indifferently either productive or
unproductive hands. Thus, not only the great landlord or the rich
merchant, but even the common workman, if his wages are
considerable, may maintain a menial servant; or he may sometimes
go to a play or a puppetshow, and so contribute his share towards
maintaining one set of unproductive labourers; or he may pay some
taxes, and thus help to maintain another set, more honourable and
useful indeed, but equally unproductive. No part of the annual
produce, however, which had been originally destined to replace a
capital, is ever directed towards maintaining unproductive hands
till after it has put into motion its full complement of
productive labour, or all that it could put into motion in the
way in which it was employed. The workman must have earned his
wages by work done before he can employ any part of them in this
manner. That part, too, is generally but a small one. It is his
spare revenue only, of which productive labourers have seldom a
great deal. They generally have some, however; and in the payment
of taxes the greatness of their number may compensate, in some
measure, the smallness of their contribution. The rent of land
and the profits of stock are everywhere, therefore, the principal
sources from which unproductive hands derive their subsistence.
These are the two sorts of revenue of which the owners have
generally most to spare. They might both maintain indifferently
either productive or unproductive hands. They seem, however, to
have some predilection for the latter. The expense of a great
lord feeds generally more idle than industrious people. The rich
merchant, though with his capital he maintains industrious people
only, yet by his expense, that is, by the employment of his
revenue, he feeds commonly the very same sort as the great lord.
     The proportion, therefore, between the productive and
unproductive hands, depends very much in every country upon the
proportion between that part of the annual produce, which, as
soon as it comes either from the ground or from the hands of the
productive labourers, is destined for replacing a capital, and
that which is destined for constituting a revenue, either as rent
or as profit. This proportion is very different in rich from what
it is in poor countries.
     Thus, at present, in the opulent countries of Europe, a very
large, frequently the largest portion of the produce of the land
is destined for replacing the capital of the rich and independent
farmer; the other for paying his profits and the rent of the
landlord. But anciently, during the prevalency of the feudal
government, a very small portion of the produce was sufficient to
replace the capital employed in cultivation. It consisted
commonly in a few wretched cattle, maintained altogether by the
spontaneous produce of uncultivated land, and which might,
therefore, be considered as a part of that spontaneous produce.
It generally, too, belonged to the landlord, and was by him
advanced to the occupiers of the land. All the rest of the
produce properly belonged to him too, either as rent for his
land, or as profit upon this paltry capital. The occupiers of
land were generally bondmen, whose persons and effects were
equally his property. Those who were not bondmen were tenants at
will, and though the rent which they paid was often nominally
little more than a quit-rent, it really amounted to the whole
produce of the land. Their lord could at all times command their
labour in peace and their service in war. Though they lived at a
distance from his house, they were equally dependent upon him as
his retainers who lived in it. But the whole produce of the land
undoubtedly belongs to him who can dispose of the labour and
service of all those whom it maintains. In the present state of
Europe, the share of the landlord seldom exceeds a third,
sometimes not a fourth part of the whole produce of the land. The
rent of land, however, in all the improved parts of the country,
has been tripled and quadrupled since those ancient times; and
this third or fourth part of the annual produce is, it seems,
three or four times greater than the whole had been before. In
the progress of improvement, rent, though it increases in
proportion to the extent, diminishes in proportion to the produce
of the land.
     In the opulent countries of Europe, great capitals are at
present employed in trade and manufactures. In the ancient state,
the little trade that was stirring, and the few homely and coarse
manufactures that were carried on, required but very small
capitals. These, however, must have yielded very large profits.
The rate of interest was nowhere less than ten per cent, and
their profits must have been sufficient to afford this great
interest. At present the rate of interest, in the improved parts
of Europe, is nowhere higher than six per cent, and in some of
the most improved it is so low as four, three, and two per cent.
Though that part of the revenue of the inhabitants which is
derived from the profits of stock is always much greater in rich
than in poor countries, it is because the stock is much greater:
in proportion to the stock the profits are generally much less.
     That part of the annual produce, therefore, which, as soon
as it comes either from the ground or from the hands of the
productive labourers, is destined for replacing a capital, is not
only much greater in rich than in poor countries, but bears a
much greater proportion to that which is immediately destined for
constituting a revenue either as rent or as profit. The funds
destined for the maintenance of productive labour are not only
much greater in the former than in the latter, but bear a much
greater proportion to those which, though they may be employed to
maintain either productive or unproductive hands, have generally
a predilection for the latter.
     The proportion between those different funds necessarily
determines in every country the general character of the
inhabitants as to industry or idleness. We are more industrious
than our forefathers; because in the present times the funds
destined for the maintenance of industry are much greater in
proportion to those which are likely to be employed in the
maintenance of idleness than they were two or three centuries
ago. Our ancestors were idle for want of a sufficient
encouragement to industry. It is better, says the proverb, to
play for nothing than to work for nothing. In mercantile and
manufacturing towns, where the inferior ranks of people are
chiefly maintained by the employment of capital, they are in
general industrious, sober, and thriving; as in many English, and
in most Dutch towns. In those towns which are principally
supported by the constant or occasional residence of a court, and
in which the inferior ranks of people are chiefly maintained by
the spending of revenue, they are in general idle, dissolute, and
poor; as at Rome, Versailles, Compiegne, and Fontainebleu. If you
except Rouen and Bordeaux, there is little trade or industry in
any of the parliament towns of France; and the inferior ranks of
people, being elderly maintained by the expense of the members of
the courts of justice, and of those who come to plead before
them, are in general idle and poor. The great trade of Rouen and
Bordeaux seems to be altogether the effect of their situation.
Rouen is necessarily the entrepot of almost all the goods which
are brought either from foreign countries, or from the maritime
provinces of France, for the consumption of the great city of
Paris. Bordeaux is in the same manner the entrepot of the wines
which grow upon the banks of the Garonne, and of the rivers which
run into it, one of the richest wine countries in the world, and
which seems to produce the wine fittest for exportation, or best
suited to the taste of foreign nations. Such advantageous
situations necessarily attract a great capital by the great
employment which they afford it; and the employment of this
capital is the cause of the industry of those two cities. In the
other parliament towns of France, very little more capital seems
to be employed than what is necessary for supplying their own
consumption; that is, little more than the smallest capital which
can be employed in them. The same thing may be said of Paris,
Madrid, and Vienna. Of those three cities, Paris is by far the
most industrious; but Paris itself is the principal market of all
the manufactures established at Paris, and its own consumption is
the principal object of all the trade which it carries on.
London, Lisbon, and Copenhagen, are, perhaps, the only three
cities in Europe which are both the constant residence of a
court, and can at the same time be considered as trading cities,
or as cities which trade not only for their own consumption, but
for that of other cities and countries. The situation of all the
three is extremely advantageous, and naturally fits them to be
the entrepots of a great part of the goods destined for the
consumption of distant places. In a city where a great revenue is
spent, to employ with advantage a capital for any other purpose
than for supplying the consumption of that city is probably more
difficult than in one in which the inferior ranks of people have
no other maintenance but what they derive from the employment of
such a capital. The idleness of the greater part of the people
who are maintained by the expense of revenue corrupts, it is
probable, the industry of those who ought to be maintained by the
employment of capital, and renders it less advantageous to employ
a capital there than in other places. There was little trade or
industry in Edinburgh before the union. When the Scotch
Parliament was no longer to be assembled in it, when it ceased to
be the necessary residence of the principal nobility and gentry
of Scotland, it became a city of some trade and industry. It
still continues, however, to be the residence of the principal
courts of justice in Scotland, of the Boards of Customs and
Excise, etc. A considerable revenue, therefore, still continues
to be spent in it. In trade and industry it is much inferior to
Glasgow, of which the inhabitants are chiefly maintained by the
employment of capital. The inhabitants of a large village, it has
sometimes been observed, after having made considerable progress
in manufactures, have become idle and poor in consequence of a
great lord having taken up his residence in their neighbourhood.
     The proportion between capital and revenue, therefore, seems
everywhere to regulate the proportion between industry and
idleness. Wherever capital predominates, industry prevails:
wherever revenue, idleness. Every increase or diminution of
capital, therefore, naturally tends to increase or diminish the
real quantity of industry, the number of productive hands, and
consequently the exchangeable value of the annual produce of the
land and labour of the country, the real wealth and revenue of
all its inhabitants.
     Capitals are increased by parsimony, and diminished by
prodigality and misconduct.
     Whatever a person saves from his revenue he adds to his
capital, and either employs it himself in maintaining an
additional number of productive hands, or enables some other
person to do so, by lending it to him for an interest, that is,
for a share of the profits. As the capital of an individual can
be increased only by what he saves from his annual revenue or his
annual gains, so the capital of a society, which is the same with
that of all the individuals who compose it, can be increased only
in the same manner.
     Parsimony, and not industry, is the immediate cause of the
increase of capital. Industry, indeed, provides the subject which
parsimony accumulates. But whatever industry might acquire, if
parsimony did not save and store up, the capital would never be
the greater.
     Parsimony, by increasing the fund which is destined for the
maintenance of productive hands, tends to increase the number of
those hands whose labour adds to the value of the subject upon
which it is bestowed. It tends, therefore, to increase the
exchangeable value of the annual produce of the land and labour
of the country. It puts into motion an additional quantity of
industry, which gives an additional value to the annual produce.
     What is annually saved is as regularly consumed as what is
annually spent, and nearly in the same time too; but it is
consumed by a different set of people. That portion of his
revenue which a rich man annually spends is in most cases
consumed by idle guests and menial servants, who leave nothing
behind them in return for their consumption. That portion which
he annually saves, as for the sake of the profit it is
immediately employed as a capital, is consumed in the same
manner, and nearly in the same time too, but by a different set
of people, by labourers, manufacturers, and artificers, who
reproduce with a profit the value of their annual consumption.
His revenue, we shall suppose, is paid him in money. Had he spent
the whole, the food, clothing, and lodging, which the whole could
have purchased, would have been distributed among the former set
of people. By saving a part of it, as that part is for the sake
of the profit immediately employed as a capital either by himself
or by some other person, the food, clothing, and lodging, which
may be purchased with it, are necessarily reserved for the
latter. The consumption is the same, but the consumers are
different.
     By what a frugal man annually saves, he not only affords
maintenance to an additional number of productive hands, for that
or the ensuing year, but, like the founder of a public workhouse,
he establishes as it were a perpetual fund for the maintenance of
an equal number in all times to come. The perpetual allotment and
destination of this fund, indeed, is not always guarded by any
positive law, by any trust-right or deed of mortmain. It is
always guarded, however, by a very powerful principle, the plain
and evident interest of every individual to whom any share of it
shall ever belong. No part of it can ever afterwards be employed
to maintain any but productive hands without an evident loss to
the person who thus perverts it from its proper destination.
     The prodigal perverts it in this manner. By not confining
his expense within his income, he encroaches upon his capital.
Like him who perverts the revenues of some pious foundation to
profane purposes, he pays the wages of idleness with those funds
which the frugality of his forefathers had, as it were,
consecrated to the maintenance of industry. By diminishing the
funds destined for the employment of productive labour, he
necessarily diminishes, so far as it depends upon him, the
quantity of that labour which adds a value to the subject upon
which it is bestowed, and, consequently, the value of the annual
produce of the land and labour of the whole country, the real
wealth and revenue of its inhabitants. If the prodigality of some
was not compensated by the frugality of others, the conduct of
every prodigal, by feeding the idle with the bread of the
industrious, tends not only to beggar himself, but to impoverish
his country.
     Though the expense of the prodigal should be altogether in
home-made, and no part of it in foreign commodities, its effect
upon the productive funds of the society would still be the same.
Every year there would still be a certain quantity of food and
clothing, which ought to have maintained productive, employed in
maintaining unproductive hands. Every year, therefore, there
would still be some diminution in what would otherwise have been
the value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the
country.
     This expense, it may be said indeed, not being in foreign
goods, and not occasioning any exportation of gold and silver,
the same quantity of money would remain in the country as before.
But if the quantity of food and clothing, which were thus
consumed by unproductive, had been distributed among productive
hands, they would have reproduced, together with a profit, the
full value of their consumption. The same quantity of money would
in this case equally have remained in the country, and there
would besides have been a reproduction of an equal value of
consumable goods. There would have been two values instead of
one.
     The same quantity of money, besides, cannot long remain in
any country in which the value of the annual produce diminishes.
The sole use of money is to circulate consumable goods. By means
of it, provisions, materials, and finished work, are bought and
sold, and distributed to their proper consumers. The quantity of
money, therefore, which can be annually employed in any country
must be determined by the value of the consumable goods annually
circulated within it. These must consist either in the immediate
produce of the land and labour of the country itself, or in
something which had been, purchased with some part of that
produce. Their value, therefore, must diminish as the value of
that produce diminishes, and along with it the quantity of money
which can be employed in circulating them. But the money which by
this annual diminution of produce is annually thrown out of
domestic circulation will not be allowed to lie idle. The
interest of whoever possesses it requires that it should be
employed. But having no employment at home, it will, in spite of
all laws and prohibitions, be sent abroad, and employed in
purchasing consumable goods which may be of some use at home. Its
annual exportation will in this manner continue for some time to
add something to the annual consumption of the country beyond the
value of its own annual produce. What in the days of its
prosperity had been saved from that annual produce, and employed
in purchasing gold and silver, will contribute for some little
time to support its consumption in adversity. The exportation of
gold and silver is, in this case, not the cause, but the effect
of its declension, and may even, for some little time, alleviate
the misery of that declension.
     The quantity of money, on the contrary, must in every
country naturally increase as the value of the annual produce
increases. The value of the consumable goods annually circulated
within the society being greater will require a greater quantity
of money to circulate them. A part of the increased produce,
therefore, will naturally be employed in purchasing, wherever it
is to be had, the additional quantity of gold and silver
necessary for circulating the rest. The increase of those metals
will in this case be the effect, not the cause, of the public
prosperity. Gold and silver are purchased everywhere in the same
manner. The food, clothing, and lodging, the revenue and
maintenance of all those whose labour or stock is employed in
bringing them from the mine to the market, is the price paid for
them in Peru as well as in England. The country which has this
price to pay will never be long without the quantity of those
metals which it has occasion for; and no country will ever long
retain a quantity which it has no occasion for.
     Whatever, therefore, we may imagine the real wealth and
revenue of a country to consist in, whether in the value of the
annual produce of its land and labour, as plain reason seems to
dictate; or in the quantity of the precious metals which
circulate within it, as vulgar prejudices suppose; in either view
of the matter, every prodigal appears to be a public enemy, and
every frugal man a public benefactor.
     The effects of misconduct are often the same as those of
prodigality. Every injudicious and unsuccessful project in
agriculture, mines, fisheries, trade, or manufactures, tends in
the same manner to diminish the funds destined for the
maintenance of productive labour. In every such project, though
the capital is consumed by productive hands only, yet, as by the
injudicious manner in which they are employed they do not
reproduce the full value of their consumption, there must always
be some diminution in what would otherwise have been the
productive funds of the society.
     It can seldom happen, indeed, that the circumstances of a
great nation can be much affected either by the prodigality or
misconduct of individuals; the profusion or imprudence of some
being always more than compensated by the frugality and good
conduct of others.
     With regard to profusion, the principle which prompts to
expense is the passion for present enjoyment; which, though
sometimes violent and very difficult to be restrained, is in
general only momentary and occasional. But the principle which
prompts to save is the desire of bettering our condition, a
desire which, though generally calm and dispassionate, comes with
us from the womb, and never leaves us till we go into the grave.
In the whole interval which separates those two moments, there is
scarce perhaps a single instant in which any man is so perfectly
and completely satisfied with his situation as to be without any
wish of alteration or improvement of any kind. An augmentation of
fortune is the means by which the greater part of men propose and
wish to better their condition. It is the means the most vulgar
and the most obvious; and the most likely way of augmenting their
fortune is to save and accumulate some part of what they acquire,
either regularly and annually, or upon some extraordinary
occasions. Though the principle of expense, therefore, prevails
in almost all men upon some occasions, and in some men upon
almost all occasions, yet in the greater part of men, taking the
whole course of their life at an average, the principle of
frugality seems not only to predominate, but to predominate very
greatly.
     With regard to misconduct, the number of prudent and
successful undertakings is everywhere much greater than that of
injudicious and unsuccessful ones. After all our complaints of
the frequency of bankruptcies, the unhappy men who fall into this
misfortune make but a very small part of the whole number engaged
in trade, and all other sorts of business; not much more perhaps
than one in a thousand. Bankruptcy is perhaps the greatest and
most humiliating calamity which can befall an innocent man. The
greater part of men, therefore, are sufficiently careful to avoid
it. Some, indeed, do not avoid it; as some do not avoid the
gallows.
     Great nations are never impoverished by private, though they
sometimes are by public prodigality and misconduct. The whole, or
almost the whole public revenue, is in most countries employed in
maintaining unproductive hands. Such are the people who compose a
numerous and splendid court, a great ecclesiastical
establishment, great fleets and armies, who in time of peace
produce nothing, and in time of war acquire nothing which can
compensate the expense of maintaining them, even while the war
lasts. Such people, as they themselves produce nothing, are all
maintained by the produce of other men's labour. When multiplied,
therefore, to an unnecessary number, they may in a particular
year consume so great a share of this produce, as not to leave a
sufficiency for maintaining the productive labourers, who should
reproduce it next year. The next year's produce, therefore, will
be less than that of the foregoing, and if the same disorder
should continue, that of the third year will be still less than
that of the second. Those unproductive hands, who should be
maintained by a part only of the spare revenue of the people, may
consume so great a share of their whole revenue, and thereby
oblige so great a number to encroach upon their capitals, upon
the funds destined for the maintenance of productive labour, that
all the frugality and good conduct of individuals may not be able
to compensate the waste and degradation of produce occasioned by
this violent and forced encroachment.
     This frugality and good conduct, however, is upon most
occasions, it appears from experience, sufficient to compensate,
not only the private prodigality and misconduct of individuals,
but the public extravagance of government. The uniform, constant,
and uninterrupted effort of every man to better his condition,
the principle from which public and national, as well as private
opulence is originally derived, is frequently powerful enough to
maintain the natural progress of things towards improvement, in
spite both of the extravagance of government and of the greatest
errors of administration. Like the unknown principle of animal
life, it frequently restores health and vigour to the
constitution, in spite, not only of the disease, but of the
absurd prescriptions of the doctor.
     The annual produce of the land and labour of any nation can
be increased in its value by no other means but by increasing
either the number of its productive labourers, or the productive
powers of those labourers who had before been employed. The
number of its productive labourers, it is evident, can never be
much increased, but in consequence of an increase of capital, or
of the funds destined for maintaining them. The productive powers
of the same number of labourers cannot be increased, but in
consequence either of some addition and improvement to those
machines and instruments which facilitate and abridge labour; or
of a more proper division and distribution of employment. In
either case an additional capital is almost always required. It
is by means of an additional capital only that the undertaker of
any work can either provide his workmen with better machinery or
make a more proper distribution of employment among them. When
the work to be done consists of a number of parts, to keep every
man constantly employed in one way requires a much greater
capital than where every man is occasionally employed in every
different part of the work. When we compare, therefore, the state
of a nation at two different periods, and find, that the annual
produce of its land and labour is evidently greater at the latter
than at the former, that its lands are better cultivated, its
manufactures more numerous and more flourishing, and its trade
more extensive, we may be assured that its capital must have
increased during the interval between those two periods, and that
more must have been added to it by the good conduct of some than
had been taken from it either by the private misconduct of others
or by the public extravagance of government. But we shall find
this to have been the case of almost all nations, in all
tolerably quiet and peaceable times, even of those who have not
enjoyed the most prudent and parsimonious governments. To form a
right judgment of it, indeed, we must compare the state of the
country at periods somewhat distant from one another. The
progress is frequently so gradual that, at near periods, the
improvement is not only not sensible, but from the declension
either of certain branches of industry, or of certain districts
of the country, things which sometimes happen though the country
in general be in great prosperity, there frequently arises a
suspicion that the riches and industry of the whole are decaying.
     The annual produce of the land and labour of England, for
example, is certainly much greater than it was, a little more
than a century ago, at the restoration of Charles II. Though, at
present, few people, I believe, doubt of this, yet during this
period, five years have seldom passed away in which some book or
pamphlet has not been published, written, too, with such
abilities as to gain some authority with the public, and
pretending to demonstrate that the wealth of the nation was fast
declining, that the country was depopulated, agriculture
neglected, manufactures decaying, and trade undone. Nor have
these publications been all party pamphlets, the wretched
offspring of falsehood and venality. Many of them have been
written by very candid and very intelligent people, who wrote
nothing but what they believed, and for no other reason but
because they believed it.
     The annual produce of the land and labour of England, again,
was certainly much greater at the Restoration, than we can
suppose it to have been about an hundred years before, at the
accession of Elizabeth. At this period, too, we have all reason
to believe, the country was much more advanced in improvement
than it had been about a century before, towards the close of the
dissensions between the houses of York and Lancaster. Even then
it was, probably, in a better condition than it had been at the
Norman Conquest, and at the Norman Conquest than during the
confusion of the Saxon Heptarchy. Even at this early period, it
was certainly a more improved country than at the invasion of
Julius Caesar, when its inhabitants were nearly in the same state
with the savages in North America.
     In each of those periods, however, there was not only much
private and public profusion, many expensive and unnecessary
wars, great perversion of the annual produce from maintaining
productive to maintain unproductive hands; but sometimes, in the
confusion of civil discord, such absolute waste and destruction
of stock, as might be supposed, not only to retard, as it
certainly did, the natural accumulation of riches, but to have
left the country, at the end of the period, poorer than at the
beginning. Thus, in the happiest and most fortunate period of
them all, that which has passed since the Restoration, how many
disorders and misfortunes have occurred, which, could they have
been foreseen, not only the impoverishment, but the total ruin of
the country would have been expected from them? The fire and the
plague of London, the two Dutch wars, the disorders of the
Revolution, the war in Ireland, the four expensive French wars of
1688, 1702, 1742, and 1756, together with the two rebellions of
1715 and 1745. In the course of the four French wars, the nation
has contracted more than a hundred and forty-five millions of
debt, over and above all the other extraordinary annual expense
which they occasioned, so that the whole cannot be computed at
less than two hundred millions. So great a share of the annual
produce of the land and labour of the country has, since the
Revolution, been employed upon different occasions in maintaining
an extraordinary number of unproductive hands. But had not those
wars given this particular direction to so large a capital, the
greater part of it would naturally have been employed in
maintaining productive hands, whose labour would have replaced,
with a profit, the whole value of their consumption. The value of
the annual produce of the land and labour of the country would
have been considerably increased by it every year, and every
year's increase would have augmented still more that of the
following year. More houses would have been built, more lands
would have been improved, and those which had been improved
before would have been better cultivated, more manufactures would
have been established. and those which had been established
before would have been more extended; and to what height the real
wealth and revenue of the country might, by this time, have been
raised, it is not perhaps very easy even to imagine.
     But though the profusion of government must, undoubtedly,
have retarded the natural progress of England towards wealth and
improvement, it has not been able to stop it. The annual produce
of its land and labour is, undoubtedly, much greater at present
than it was either at the Restoration or at the Revolution. The
capital, therefore, annually employed in cultivating this land,
and in maintaining this labour, must likewise be much greater. In
the midst of all the exactions of government, this capital has
been silently and gradually accumulated by the private frugality
and good conduct of individuals, by their universal, continual,
and uninterrupted effort to better their own condition. It is
this effort, protected by law and allowed by liberty to exert
itself in the manner that is most advantageous, which has
maintained the progress of England towards opulence and
improvement in almost all former times, and which, it is to be
hoped, will do so in all future times. England, however, as it
has never been blessed with a very parsimonious government, so
parsimony has at no time been the characteristical virtue of its
inhabitants. It is the highest impertinence and presumption,
therefore, in kings and ministers, to pretend to watch over the
economy of private people, and to restrain their expense, either
by sumptuary laws, or by prohibiting the importation of foreign
luxuries. They are themselves always, and without any exception,
the greatest spendthrifts in the society. Let them look well
after their own expense, and they may safely trust private people
with theirs. If their own extravagance does not ruin the state,
that of their subjects never will.
     As frugality increases and prodigality diminishes the public
capital, so the conduct of those whose expense just equals their
revenue, without either accumulating or encroaching, neither
increases nor diminishes it. Some modes of expense, however, seem
to contribute more to the growth of public opulence than others.
     The revenue of an individual may be spent either in things
which are consumed immediately, and in which one day's expense
can neither alleviate nor support that of another, or it may be
spent in things more durable, which can therefore be accumulated,
and in which every day's expense may, as he chooses, either
alleviate or support and heighten the effect of that of the
following day. A man of fortune, for example, may either spend
his revenue in a profuse and sumptuous table, and in maintaining
a great number of menial servants, and a multitude of dogs and
horses; or contenting himself with a frugal table and few
attendants, he may lay out the greater part of it in adorning his
house or his country villa, in useful or ornamental buildings, in
useful or ornamental furniture, in collecting books, statues,
pictures; or in things more frivolous, jewels, baubles, ingenious
trinkets of different kinds; or, what is most trifling of all, in
amassing a great wardrobe of fine clothes, like the favourite and
minister of a great prince who died a few years ago. Were two men
of equal fortune to spend their revenue, the one chiefly in the
one way, the other in the other, the magnificence of the person
whose expense had been chiefly in durable commodities, would be
continually increasing, every day's expense contributing
something to support and heighten the effect of that of the
following day: that of the other, on the contrary, would be no
greater at the end of the period than at the beginning. The
former, too, would, at the end of the period, be the richer man
of the two. He would have a stock of goods of some kind or other,
which, though it might not be worth all that it cost, would
always be worth something. No trace or vestige of the expense of
the latter would remain, and the effects of ten or twenty years
profusion would be as completely annihilated as if they had never
existed.
     As the one mode of expense is more favourable than the other
to the opulence of an individual, so is it likewise to that of a
nation. The houses, the furniture, the clothing of the rich, in a
little time, become useful to the inferior and middling ranks of
people. They are able to purchase them when their superiors grow
weary of them, and the general accommodation of the whole people
is thus gradually improved, when this mode of expense becomes
universal among men of fortune. In countries which have long been
rich, you will frequently find the inferior ranks of people in
possession both of houses and furniture perfectly good and
entire, but of which neither the one could have been built, nor
the other have been made for their use. What was formerly a seat
of the family of Seymour is now an inn upon the Bath road. The
marriage-bed of James the First of Great Britain, which his queen
brought with her from Denmark as a present fit for a sovereign to
make to a sovereign, was, a few years ago, the ornament of an
alehouse at Dunfermline. In some ancient cities, which either
have been long stationary, or have gone somewhat to decay, you
will sometimes scarce find a single house which could have been
built for its present inhabitants. If you go into those houses
too, you will frequently find many excellent, though antiquated
pieces of furniture, which are still very fit for use, and which
could as little have been made for them. Noble palaces,
magnificent villas, great collections of books, statues, pictures
and other curiosities, are frequently both an ornament and an
honour, not only to the neighbourhood, but to the whole country
to which they belong. Versailles is an ornament and an honour to
France, Stowe and Wilton to England. Italy still continues to
command some sort of veneration by the number of monuments of
this kind which it possesses, though the wealth which produced
them has decayed, and though the genius which planned them seems
to be extinguished, perhaps from not having the same employment.
     The expense too, which is laid out in durable commodities,
is favourable, not only to accumulation, but to frugality. If a
person should at any time exceed in it, he can easily reform
without exposing himself to the censure of the public. To reduce
very much the number of his servants, to reform his table from
great profusion to great frugality, to lay down his equipage
after he has once set it up, are changes which cannot escape the
observation of his neighbours, and which are supposed to imply
some acknowledgment of preceding bad conduct. Few, therefore, of
those who have once been so unfortunate as to launch out too far
into this sort of expense, have afterwards the courage to reform,
till ruin and bankruptcy oblige them. But if a person has, at any
time, been at too great an expense in building, in furniture, in
books or pictures, no imprudence can be inferred from his
changing his conduct. These are things in which further expense
is frequently rendered unnecessary by former expense; and when a
person stops short, he appears to do so, not because he has
exceeded his fortune, but because he has satisfied his fancy.
     The expense, besides, that is laid out in durable
commodities gives maintenance, commonly, to a greater number of
people than that which is employed in the most profuse
hospitality. Of two or three hundredweight of provisions, which
may sometimes be served up at a great festival, one half,
perhaps, is thrown to the dunghill, and there is always a great
deal wasted and abused. But if the expense of this entertainment
had been employed in setting to work masons, carpenters,
upholsterers, mechanics, etc., a quantity of provisions, of equal
value, would have been distributed among a still greater number
of people who would have bought them in pennyworths and pound
weights, and not have lost or thrown away a single ounce of them.
In the one way, besides, this expense maintains productive, in
the other unproductive hands. In the one way, therefore, it
increases, in the other, it does not increase, the exchangeable
value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the
country.
     I would not, however, by all this be understood to mean that
the one species of expense always betokens a more liberal or
generous spirit than the other. When a man of fortune spends his
revenue chiefly in hospitality, he shares the greater part of it
with his friends and companions; but when he employs it in
purchasing such durable commodities, he often spends the whole
upon his own person, and gives nothing to anybody without an
equivalent. The latter species of expense, therefore, especially
when directed towards frivolous objects, the little ornaments of
dress and furniture, jewels, trinkets, gewgaws, frequently
indicates, not only a trifling, but a base and selfish
disposition. All that I mean is, that the one sort of expense, as
it always occasions some accumulation of valuable commodities, as
it is more favourable to private frugality, and, consequently, to
the increase of the public capital, and as it maintains
productive, rather than unproductive hands, conduces more than
the other to the growth of public opulence.  

                             CHAPTER IV

                     Of Stock Lent at Interest 

     THE stock which is lent at interest is always considered as
a capital by the lender. He expects that in due time it is to be
restored to him, and that in the meantime the borrower is to pay
him a certain annual rent for the use of it. The borrower may use
it either as a capital, or as a stock reserved for immediate
consumption. If he uses it as a capital, he employs it in the
maintenance of productive labourers, who reproduce the value with
a profit. He can, in this case, both restore the capital and pay
the interest without alienating or encroaching upon any other
source of revenue. If he uses it as a stock reserved for
immediate consumption, he acts the part of a prodigal, and
dissipates in the maintenance of the idle what was destined for
the support of the industrious. He can, in this case, neither
restore the capital nor pay the interest without either
alienating or encroaching upon some other source of revenue, such
as the property or the rent of land.
     The stock which is lent at interest is, no doubt,
occasionally employed in both these ways, but in the former much
more frequently than in the latter. The man who borrows in order
to spend will soon be ruined, and he who lends to him will
generally have occasion to repent of his folly. To borrow or to
lend for such a purpose, therefore, is in all cases, where gross
usury is out of the question, contrary to the interest of both
parties; and though it no doubt happens sometimes that people do
both the one and the other; yet, from the regard that all men
have for their own interest, we may be assured that it cannot
happen so very frequently as we are sometimes apt to imagine. Ask
any rich man of common prudence to which of the two sorts of
people he has lent the greater part of his stock, to those who,
he thinks, will employ it profitably, or to those who will spend
it idly, and he will laugh at you for proposing the question.
Even among borrowers, therefore, not the people in the world most
famous for frugality, the number of the frugal and industrious
surpasses considerably that of the prodigal and idle.
     The only people to whom stock is commonly lent, without
their being expected to make any very profitable use of it, are
country gentlemen who borrow upon mortgage. Even they scarce ever
borrow merely to spend. What they borrow, one may say, is
commonly spent before they borrow it. They have generally
consumed so great a quantity of goods, advanced to them upon
credit by shopkeepers and tradesmen, that they find it necessary
to borrow at interest in order to pay the debt. The capital
borrowed replaces the capitals of those shopkeepers and
tradesmen, which the country gentlemen could not have replaced
from the rents of their estates. It is not properly borrowed in
order to be spent, but in order to replace a capital which had
been spent before.
     Almost all loans at interest are made in money, either of
paper, or of gold and silver. But what the borrower really wants,
and what the lender really supplies him with, is not the money,
but the money's worth, or the goods which it can purchase. If he
wants it as a stock for immediate consumption, it is those goods
only which he can place in that stock. If he wants it as a
capital for employing industry, it is from those goods only that
the industrious can be furnished with the tools, materials, and
maintenance necessary for carrying on their work. By means of the
loan, the lender, as it were, assigns to the borrower his right
to a certain portion of the annual produce of the land and labour
of the country to be employed as the borrower pleases.
     The quantity of stock, therefore, or, as it is commonly
expressed, of money which can be lent at interest in any country,
is not regulated by the value of the money, whether paper or
coin, which serves as the instrument of the different loans made
in that country, but by the value of that part of the annual
produce which, as soon as it comes either from the ground, or
from the hands of the productive labourers, is destined not only
for replacing a capital, but such a capital as the owner does not
care to be at the trouble of employing himself. As such capitals
are commonly lent out and paid back in money, they constitute
what is called the monied interest. It is distinct, not only from
the landed, but from the trading and manufacturing interests, as
in these last the owners themselves employ their own capitals.
Even in the monied interest, however, the money is, as it were,
but the deed of assignment, which conveys from one hand to
another those capitals which the owners do not care to employ
themselves. Those capitals may be greater in almost any
proportion than the amount of the money which serves as the
instrument of their conveyance; the same pieces of money
successively serving for many different loans, as well as for
many different purchases. A, for example, lends to W a thousand
pounds, with which W immediately purchases of B a thousand
pounds' worth of goods. B having no occasion for the money
himself, lends the identical pieces to X, with which X
immediately purchases of C another thousand pounds' worth of
goods. C in the same manner, and for the same reason, lends them
to Y, who again purchases goods with them of D. In this manner
the same pieces, either of coin or paper, may in the course of a
few days, serve as the instrument of three different loans, and
of three different purchases, each of which is, in value, equal
to the whole amount of those pieces. What the three monied men A,
B, and C assign to the three borrowers, W, X, Y, is the power of
making those purchases. In this power consist both the value and
the use of the loans. The stock lent by the three monied men is
equal to the value of the goods which can be purchased with it,
and is three times greater than that of the money with which the
purchases are made. Those loans however, may be all perfectly
well secured, the goods purchased by the different debtors being
so employed as, in due time, to bring back, with a profit, an
equal value either of coin or of paper. And as the same pieces of
money can thus serve as the instrument of different loans to
three, or for the same reason, to thirty times their value, so
they may likewise successively serve as the instrument of
repayment.
     A capital lent at interest may, in this manner, be
considered as an assignment from the lender to the borrowers of a
certain considerable portion of the annual produce; upon
condition that the borrower in return shall, during the
continuance of the loan, annually assign to the lender a smaller
portion, called the interest; and at the end of it a portion
equally considerable with that which had originally been assigned
to him, called the repayment. Though money, either coin or paper,
serves generally as the deed of assignment both to the smaller
and to the more considerable portion, it is itself altogether
different from what is assigned by it.
     In proportion as that share of the annual produce which, as
soon as it comes either from the ground, or from the hands of the
productive labourers, is destined for replacing a capital,
increases in any country, what is called the monied interest
naturally increases with it. The increase of those particular
capitals from which the owners wish to derive a revenue, without
being at the trouble of employing them themselves, naturally
accompanies the general increase of capitals; or, in other words,
as stock increases, the quantity of stock to be lent at interest
grows gradually greater and greater.
     As the quantity of stock to be lent at interest increases,
the interest, or the price which must be paid for the use of that
stock, necessarily diminishes, not only from those general causes
which make the market price of things commonly diminish as their
quantity increases, but from other causes which are peculiar to
this particular case. As capitals increase in any country, the
profits which can be made by employing them necessarily diminish.
It becomes gradually more and more difficult to find within the
country a profitable method of employing any new capital. There
arises in consequence a competition between different capitals,
the owner of one endeavouring to get possession of that
employment which is occupied by another. But upon most occasions
he can hope to jostle that other out of this employment by no
other means but by dealing upon more reasonable terms. He must
not only sell what he deals in somewhat cheaper, but in order to
get it to sell, he must sometimes, too, buy it dearer. The demand
for productive labour, by the increase of the funds which are
destined for maintaining it, grows every day greater and greater.
Labourers easily find employment, but the owners of capitals find
it difficult to get labourers to employ. Their competition raises
the wages of labour and sinks the profits of stock. But when the
profits which can be made by the use of a capital are in this
manner diminished, as it were, at both ends, the price which can
be paid for the use of it, that is, the rate of interest, must
necessarily be diminished with them.
     Mr. Locke, Mr. Law, and Mr. Montesquieu, as well as many
other writers, seem to have imagined that the increase of the
quantity of gold and silver, in consequence of the discovery of
the Spanish West Indies, was the real cause of the lowering of
the rate of interest through the greater part of Europe. Those
metals, they say, having become of less value themselves, the use
of any particular portion of them necessarily became of less
value too, and consequently the price which could be paid for it.
This notion, which at first sight seems plausible, has been so
fully exposed by Mr. Hume that it is, perhaps, unnecessary to say
anything more about it. The following very short and plain
argument, however, may serve to explain more distinctly the
fallacy which seems to have misled those gentlemen.
     Before the discovery of the Spanish West Indies, ten per
cent seems to have been the common rate of interest through the
greater part of Europe. It has since that time in different
countries sunk to six, five, four, and three per cent. Let us
suppose that in every particular country the value of silver has
sunk precisely in the same proportion as the rate of interest;
and that in those countries, for example, where interest has been
reduced from ten to five per cent, the same quantity of silver
can now purchase just half the quantity of goods which it could
have purchased before. This supposition will not, I believe, be
found anywhere agreeable to the truth, but it is the most
favourable to the opinion which we are going to examine; and even
upon this supposition it is utterly impossible that the lowering
of the value of silver could have the smallest tendency to lower
the rate of interest. If a hundred pounds are in those countries
now of no more value than fifty pounds were then, ten pounds must
now be of no more value than five pounds were then. Whatever were
the causes which lowered the value of the capital, the same must
necessarily have lowered that of the interest, and exactly in the
same proportion. The proportion between the value of the capital
and that of the interest must have remained the same, though the
rate had been altered. By altering the rate, on the contrary, the
proportion between those two values is necessarily altered. If a
hundred pounds now are worth no more than fifty were then, five
pounds now can be worth no more than two pounds ten shillings
were then. By reducing the rate of interest, therefore, from ten
to five per cent, we give for the use of a capital, which is
supposed to be equal to one half of its former value, an interest
which is equal to one fourth only of the value of the former
interest.
     Any increase in the quantity of silver, while that of the
commodities circulated by means of it remained the same, could
have no other effect than to diminish the value of that metal.
The nominal value of all sorts of goods would be greater, but
their real value would be precisely the same as before. They
would be exchanged for a greater number of pieces of silver; but
the quantity of labour which they could command, the number of
people whom they could maintain and employ, would be precisely
the same. The capital of the country would be the same, though a
greater number of pieces might be requisite for conveying any
equal portion of it from one hand to another. The deeds of
assignment, like the conveyances of a verbose attorney, would be
more cumbersome, but the thing assigned would be precisely the
same as before, and could produce only the same effects. The
funds for maintaining productive labour being the same, the
demand for it would be the same. Its price or wages, therefore,
though nominally greater, would really be the same. They would be
paid in a greater number of pieces of silver; but they would
purchase only the same quantity of goods. The profits of stock
would be the same both nominally and really. The wages of labour
are commonly computed by the quantity of silver which is paid to
the labourer. When that is increased, therefore, his wages appear
to be increased, though they may sometimes be no greater than
before. But the profits of stock are not computed by the number
of pieces of silver with which they are paid, but by the
proportion which those pieces bear to the whole capital employed.
Thus in a particular country five shillings a week are said to be
the common wages of labour, and ten per cent the common profits
of stock. But the whole capital of the country being the same as
before, the competition between the different capitals of
individuals into which it was divided would likewise be the same.
They would all trade with the same advantages and disadvantages.
The common proportion between capital and profit, therefore,
would be the same, and consequently the common interest of money;
what can commonly be given for the use of money being necessarily
regulated by what can commonly be made by the use of it.
     Any increase in the quantity of commodities annually
circulated within the country, while that of the money which
circulated them remained the same, would, on the contrary,
produce many other important effects, besides that of raising the
value of the money. The capital of the country, though it might
nominally be the same, would really be augmented. It might
continue to be expressed by the same quantity of money, but it
would command a greater quantity of labour. The quantity of
productive labour which it could maintain and employ would be
increased, and consequently the demand for that labour. Its wages
would naturally rise with the demand, and yet might appear to
sink. They might be paid with a smaller quantity of money, but
that smaller quantity might purchase a greater quantity of goods
than a greater had done before. The profits of stock would be
diminished both really and in appearance. The whole capital of
the country being augmented, the competition between the
different capitals of which it was composed would naturally be
augmented along with it. The owners of those particular capitals
would be obliged to content themselves with a smaller proportion
of the produce of that labour which their respective capitals
employed. The interest of money, keeping pace always with the
profits of stock, might, in this manner, be greatly diminished,
though the value of money, or the quantity of goods which any
particular sum could purchase, was greatly augmented.
     In some countries the interest of money has been prohibited
by law. But as something can everywhere be made by the use of
money, something ought everywhere to be paid for the use of it.
This regulation, instead of preventing, has been found from
experience to increase the evil of usury; the debtor being
obliged to pay, not only for the use of the money, but for the
risk which his creditor runs by accepting a compensation for that
use. He is obliged, if one may say so, to insure his creditor
from the penalties of usury.
     In countries where interest is permitted, the law, in order
to prevent the extortion of usury, generally fixes the highest
rate which can be taken without incurring a penalty. This rate
ought always to be somewhat above the lowest market price, or the
price which is commonly paid for the use of money by those who
can give the most undoubted security. If this legal rate should
be fixed below the lowest market rate, the effects of this
fixation must be nearly the same as those of a total prohibition
of interest. The creditor will not lend his money for less than
the use of it is worth, and the debtor must pay him for the risk
which he runs by accepting the full value of that use. If it is
fixed precisely at the lowest market price, it ruins with honest
people, who respect the laws of their country, the credit of all
those who cannot give the very best security, and obliges them to
have recourse to exorbitant usurers. In a country, such as Great
Britain, where money is lent to government at three per cent and
to private people upon a good security at four and four and a
half, the present legal rate, five per cent, is perhaps as proper
as any.
     The legal rate, it is to be observed, though it ought to be
somewhat above, ought not to be much above the lowest market
rate. If the legal rate of interest in Great Britain, for
example, was fixed so high as eight or ten per cent, the greater
part of the money which was to be lent would be lent to prodigals
and projectors, who alone would be willing to give this high
interest. Sober people, who will give for the use of money no
more than a part of what they are likely to make by the use of
it, would not venture into the competition. A great part of the
capital of the country would thus be kept out of the hands which
were most likely to make a profitable and advantageous use of it,
and thrown into those which were most likely to waste and destroy
it. Where the legal rate of interest, on the contrary, is fixed
but a very little above the lowest market rate, sober people are
universally preferred, as borrowers, to prodigals and projectors.
The person who lends money gets nearly as much interest from the
former as he dares to take from the latter, and his money is much
safer in the hands of the one set of people than in those of the
other. A great part of the capital of the country is thus thrown
into the hands in which it is most likely to be employed with
advantage.
     No law can reduce the common rate of interest below the
lowest ordinary market rate at the time when that law is made.
Notwithstanding the edict of 1766, by which the French king
attempted to reduce the rate of interest from five to four per
cent, money continued to be lent in France at five per cent, the
law being evaded in several different ways.
     The ordinary market price of land, it is to be observed,
depends everywhere upon the ordinary market rate of interest. The
person who has a capital from which he wishes to derive a
revenue, without taking the trouble to employ it himself,
deliberates whether he should buy land with it or lend it out at
interest. The superior security of land, together with some other
advantages which almost everywhere attend upon this species of
property, will generally dispose him to content himself with a
smaller revenue from land than what he might have by lending out
his money at interest. These advantages are sufficient to
compensate a certain difference of revenue; but they will
compensate a certain difference only; and if the rent of land
should fall short of the interest of money by a greater
difference, nobody would buy land, which would soon reduce its
ordinary price. On the contrary, if the advantages should much
more than compensate the difference, everybody would buy land,
which again would soon raise its ordinary price. When interest
was at ten per cent, land was commonly sold for ten and twelve
years' purchase. As interest sunk to six, five, and four per
cent, the price of land rose to twenty, five-and-twenty, and
thirty years' purchase. The market rate of interest is higher in
France than in England; and the common price of land is lower. In
England it commonly sells at thirty, in France at twenty years'
purchase.  

                             CHAPTER V

               Of the Different Employment of Capitals 

     THOUGH all capitals are destined for the maintenance of
productive labour only, yet the quantity of that labour which
equal capitals are capable of putting into motion varies
extremely according to the diversity of their employment; as does
likewise the value which that employment adds to the annual
produce of the land and labour of the country.
     A capital may be employed in four different ways: either,
first, in procuring the rude produce annually required for the
use and consumption of the society; or, secondly, in
manufacturing and preparing that rude produce for immediate use
and consumption; or, thirdly, in transporting either the rude or
manufactured produce from the places where they abound to those
where they are wanted; or, lastly, in dividing particular
portions of either into such small parcels as suit the occasional
demands of those who want them. In the first way are employed the
capitals of all those who undertake the improvement or
cultivation of lands, mines, or fisheries; in the second, those
of all master manufacturers; in the third, those of all wholesale
merchants; and in the fourth, those of all retailers. It is
difficult to conceive that a capital should be employed in any
way which may not be classed under some one or other of those
four.
     Each of these four methods of employing a capital is
essentially necessary either to the existence or extension of the
other three, or to the general conveniency of the society.
     Unless a capital was employed in furnishing rude produce to
a certain degree of abundance, neither manufactures nor trade of
any kind could exist.
     Unless a capital was employed in manufacturing that part of
the rude produce which requires a good deal of preparation before
it can be fit for use and consumption, it either would never be
produced, because there could be no demand for it; or if it was
produced spontaneously, it would be of no value in exchange, and
could add nothing to the wealth of the society.
     Unless a capital was employed in transporting either the
rude or manufactured produce from the places where it abounds to
those where it is wanted, no more of either could be produced
than was necessary for the consumption of the neighbourhood. The
capital of the merchant exchanges the surplus produce of one
place for that of another, and thus encourages the industry and
increases the enjoyments of both.
     Unless a capital was employed in breaking and dividing
certain portions either of the rude or manufactured produce into
such small parcels as suit the occasional demands of those who
want them, every man would be obliged to purchase a greater
quantity of the goods he wanted than his immediate occasions
required. If there was no such trade as a butcher, for example,
every man would be obliged to purchase a whole ox or a whole
sheep at a time. This would generally be inconvenient to the
rich, and much more so to the poor. If a poor workman was obliged
to purchase a month's or six months' provisions at a time, a
great part of the stock which he employs as a capital in the
instruments of his trade, or in the furniture of his shop, and
which yields him a revenue. he would be forced to place in that
part of his stock which is reserved for immediate consumption,
and which yields him no revenue. Nothing can be more convenient
for such a person than to be able to purchase his subsistence
from day to day, or even from hour to hour, as he wants it. He is
thereby enabled to employ almost his whole stock as a capital. He
is thus enabled to furnish work to a greater value, and the
profit, which he makes by it in this way, much more than
compensates the additional price which the profit of the retailer
imposes upon the goods. The prejudices of some political writers
against shopkeepers and tradesmen are altogether without
foundation. So far is it from being necessary either to tax them
or to restrict their numbers that they can never be multiplied so
as to hurt the public, though they may so as to hurt one another.
The quantity of grocery goods, for example, which can be sold in
a particular town is limited by the demand of that town and its
neighbourhood. The capital, therefore, which can be employed in
the grocery trade cannot exceed what is sufficient to purchase
that quantity. If this capital is divided between two different
grocers, their competition will tend to make both of them sell
cheaper than if it were in the hands of one only; and if it were
divided among twenty, their competition would be just so much the
greater, and the chance of their combining together, in order to
raise the price, just so much the less. Their competition might
perhaps ruin some of themselves; but to take care of this is the
business of the parties concerned, and it may safely be trusted
to their discretion. It can never hurt either the consumer or the
producer; on the contrary, it must tend to make the retailers
both sell cheaper and buy dearer than if the whole trade was
monopolized by one or two persons. Some of them, perhaps, may
sometimes decoy a weak customer to buy what he has no occasion
for. This evil, however, is of too little importance to deserve
the public attention, nor would it necessarily be prevented by
restricting their numbers. It is not the multitude of ale-houses,
to give the most suspicious example, that occasions a general
disposition to drunkenness among the common people; but that
disposition arising from other causes necessarily gives
employment to a multitude of ale-houses.
     The persons whose capitals are employed in any of those four
ways are themselves productive labourers. Their labour, when
properly directed, fixes and realizes itself in the subject or
vendible commodity upon which it is bestowed, and generally adds
to its price the value at least of their own maintenance and
consumption. The profits of the farmer, of the manufacturer, of
the merchant, and retailer, are all drawn from the price of the
goods which the two first produce, and the two last buy and sell.
Equal capitals, however, employed in each of those four different
ways, will immediately put into motion very different quantities
of productive labour, and augment, too, in very different
proportions the value of the annual produce of the land and
labour of the society to which they belong.
     The capital of the retailer replaces, together with its
profits, that of the merchant of whom he purchases goods, and
thereby enables him to continue his business. The retailer
himself is the only productive labourer whom it immediately
employs. In his profits consists the whole value which its
employment adds to the annual produce of the land and labour of
the society.
     The capital of the wholesale merchant replaces, together
with their profits, the capitals of the farmers and manufacturers
of whom he purchases the rude and manufactured produce which he
deals in, and thereby enables them to continue their respective
trades. It is by this service chiefly that he contributes
indirectly to support the productive labour of the society, and
to increase the value of its annual produce. His capital employs,
too, the sailors and carriers who transport his goods from one
place to another, and it augments the price of those goods by the
value, not only of his profits, but of their wages. This is all
the productive labour which it immediately puts into motion, and
all the value which it immediately adds to the annual produce.
Its operation in both these respects is a good deal superior to
that of the capital of the retailer.
     Part of the capital of the master manufacturer is employed
as a fixed capital in the instruments of his trade, and replaces,
together with its profits, that of some other artificer of whom
he purchases them. Part of his circulating capital is employed in
purchasing materials, and replaces, with their profits, the
capitals of the farmers and miners of whom he purchases them. But
a great part of it is always, either annually, or in a much
shorter period, distributed among the different workmen whom he
employs. It augments the value of those materials by their wages,
and by their matters' profits upon the whole stock of wages,
materials, and instruments of trade employed in the business. It
puts immediately into motion, therefore, a much greater quantity
of productive labour, and adds a much greater value to the annual
produce of the land and labour of the society than an equal
capital in the hands of any wholesale merchant.
     No equal capital puts into motion a greater quantity of
productive labour than that of the farmer. Not only his labouring
servants, but his labouring cattle, are productive labourers. In
agriculture, too, nature labours along with man; and though her
labour costs no expense, its produce has its value, as well as
that of the most expensive workmen. The most important operations
of agriculture seem intended not so much to increase, though they
do that too, as to direct the fertility of nature towards the
production of the plants most profitable to man. A field
overgrown with briars and brambles may frequently produce as
great a quantity of vegetables as the best cultivated vineyard or
corn field. Planting and tillage frequently regulate more than
they animate the active fertility of nature; and after all their
labour, a great part of the work always remains to be done by
her. The labourers and labouring cattle, therefore, employed in
agriculture, not only occasion, like the workmen in manufactures,
the reproduction of a value equal to their own consumption, or to
the capital which employs them, together with its owners'
profits; but of a much greater value. Over and above the capital
of the farmer and all its profits, they regularly occasion the
reproduction of the rent of the landlord. This rent may be
considered as the produce of those powers of nature, the use of
which the landlord lends to the farmer. It is greater or smaller
according to the supposed extent of those powers, or in other
words, according to the supposed natural or improved fertility of
the land. It is the work of nature which remains after deducting
or compensating everything which can be regarded as the work of
man. It is seldom less than a fourth, and frequently more than a
third of the whole produce. No equal quantity of productive
labour employed in manufactures can ever occasion so great a
reproduction. In them nature does nothing; man does all; and the
reproduction must always be in proportion to the strength of the
agents that occasion it. The capital employed in agriculture,
therefore, not only puts into motion a greater quantity of
productive labour than any equal capital employed in
manufactures, but in proportion, too, to the quantity of
productive labour which it employs, it adds a much greater value
to the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, to
the real wealth and revenue of its inhabitants. Of all the ways
in which a capital can be employed, it is by far the most
advantageous to the society.
     The capitals employed in the agriculture and in the retail
trade of any society must always reside within that society.
Their employment is confined almost to a precise spot, to the
farm and to the shop of the retailer. They must generally, too,
though there are some exceptions to this, belong to resident
members of the society.
     The capital of a wholesale merchant, on the contrary, seems
to have no fixed or necessary residence anywhere, but may wander
about from place to place, according as it can either buy cheap
or sell dear.
     The capital of the manufacturer must no doubt reside where
the manufacture is carried on; but where this shall be is not
always necessarily determined. It may frequently be at a great
distance both from the place where the materials grow, and from
that where the complete manufacture is consumed. Lyons is very
distant both from the places which afford the materials of its
manufactures, and from those which consume them. The people of
fashion in Sicily are clothed in silks made in other countries,
from the materials which their own produces. Part of the wool of
Spain is manufactured in Great Britain, and some part of that
cloth is afterwards sent back to Spain.
     Whether the merchant whose capital exports the surplus
produce of any society be a native or a foreigner is of very
little importance. If he is a foreigner, the number of their
productive labourers is necessarily less than if he had been a
native by one man only, and the value of their annual produce by
the profits of that one man. The sailors or carriers whom he
employs may still belong indifferently either to his country or
to their country, or to some third country, in the same manner as
if he had been a native. The capital of a foreigner gives a value
to their surplus produce equally with that of a native by
exchanging it for something for which there is a demand at home.
It as effectually replaces the capital of the person who produces
that surplus, and as effectually enables him to continue his
business; the service by which the capital of a wholesale
merchant chiefly contributes to support the productive labour,
and to augment the value of the annual produce of the society to
which he belongs.
     It is of more consequence that the capital of the
manufacturer should reside within the country. It necessarily
puts into motion a greater quantity of productive labour, and
adds a greater value to the annual produce of the land and labour
of the society. It may, however, be very useful to the country,
though it should not reside within it. The capitals of the
British manufacturers who work up the flax and hemp annually
imported from the coasts of the Baltic are surely very useful to
the countries which produce them. Those materials are a part of
the surplus produce of those countries which, unless it was
annually exchanged for something which is in demand there, would
be of no value, and would soon cease to be produced. The
merchants who export it replace the capitals of the people who
produce it, and thereby encourage them to continue the
production; and the British manufacturers replace the capitals of
those merchants.
     A particular country, in the same manner as a particular
person, may frequently not have capital sufficient both to
improve and cultivate all its lands, to manufacture and prepare
their whole rude produce for immediate use and consumption, and
to transport the surplus part either of the rude or manufactured
produce to those distant markets where it can be exchanged for
something for which there is a demand at home. The inhabitants of
many different parts of Great Britain have not capital sufficient
to improve and cultivate all their lands. The wool of the
southern counties of Scotland is, a great part of it, after a
long land carriage through very bad roads, manufactured in
Yorkshire, for want of capital to manufacture it at home. There
are many little manufacturing towns in Great Britain, of which
the inhabitants have not capital sufficient to transport the
produce of their own industry to those distant markets where
there is demand and consumption for it. If there are any
merchants among them, they are properly only the agents of
wealthier merchants who reside in some of the greater commercial
cities.
     When the capital of any country is not sufficient for all
those three purposes, in proportion as a greater share of it is
employed in agriculture, the greater will be the quantity of
productive labour which it puts into motion within the country;
as will likewise be the value which its employment adds to the
annual produce of the land and labour of the society. After
agriculture, the capital employed in manufactures puts into
motion the greatest quantity of productive labour, and adds the
greatest value to the annual produce. That which is employed in
the trade of exportation has the least effect of any of the
three.
     The country, indeed, which has not capital sufficient for
all those three purposes has not arrived at that degree of
opulence for which it seems naturally destined. To attempt,
however, prematurely and with an insufficient capital to do all
the three is certainly not the shortest way for a society, no
more than it would be for an individual, to acquire a sufficient
one. The capital of all the individuals of a nation has its
limits in the same manner as that of a single individual, and is
capable of executing only certain purposes. The capital of all
the individuals of a nation is increased in the same manner as
that of a single individual by their continually accumulating and
adding to it whatever they save out of their revenue. It is
likely to increase the fastest, therefore, when it is employed in
the way that affords the greatest revenue to all the inhabitants
of the country, as they will thus be enabled to make the greatest
savings. But the revenue of all the inhabitants of the country is
necessarily in proportion to the value of the annual produce of
their land and labour.
     It has been the principal cause of the rapid progress of our
American colonies towards wealth and greatness that almost their
whole capitals have hitherto been employed in agriculture. They
have no manufactures, those household and courser manufactures
excepted which necessarily accompany the progress of agriculture,
and which are the work of the women and children in every private
family. The greater part both of the exportation and coasting
trade of America is carried on by the capitals of merchants who
reside in Great Britain. Even the stores and warehouses from
which goods are retailed in some provinces, particularly in
Virginia and Maryland, belong many of them to merchants who
reside in the mother country, and afford one of the few instances
of the retail trade of a society being carried on by the capitals
of those who are not resident members of it. Were the Americans,
either by combination or by any other sort of violence, to stop
the importation of European manufactures, and, by thus giving a
monopoly to such of their own countrymen as could manufacture the
like goods, divert any considerable part of their capital into
this employment, they would retard instead of accelerating the
further increase in the value of their annual produce, and would
obstruct instead of promoting the progress of their country
towards real wealth and greatness. This would be still more the
case were they to attempt, in the same manner, to monopolize to
themselves their whole exportation trade.
     The course of human prosperity, indeed, seems scarce ever to
have been of so long continuance as to enable any great country
to acquire capital sufficient for all those three purposes;
unless perhaps, we give credit to the wonderful accounts of the
wealth and cultivation of China, of those of ancient Egypt, and
of the ancient state of Indostan. Even those three countries, the
wealthiest, according to all accounts, that ever were in the
world, are chiefly renowned for their superiority in agriculture
and manufactures. They do not appear to have been eminent for
foreign trade. The ancient Egyptians had a superstitious
antipathy to the sea; a superstition nearly of the same kind
prevails among the Indians; and the Chinese have never excelled
in foreign commerce. The greater part of the surplus produce of
all those three countries seems to have been always exported by
foreigners, who gave in exchange for it something else for which
they found a demand there, frequently gold and silver.
     It is thus that the same capital will in any country put
into motion a greater or smaller quantity of productive labour,
and add a greater or smaller value to the annual produce of its
land and labour, according to the different proportions in which
it is employed in agriculture, manufactures, and wholesale trade.
The difference, too, is very great, according to the different
sorts of wholesale trade in which any part of it is employed.
     All wholesale trade, all buying in order to sell again by
wholesale, may be reduced to three different sorts. The home
trade, the foreign trade of consumption, and the carrying trade.
The home trade is employed in purchasing in one part of the same
country, and selling in another, the produce of the industry of
that country. It comprehends both the inland and the coasting
trade. The foreign trade of consumption is employed in purchasing
foreign goods for home consumption. The carrying trade is
employed in transacting the commerce of foreign countries, or in
carrying the surplus produce of one to another.
     The capital which is employed in purchasing in one part of
the country in order to sell in another the produce of the
industry of that country, generally replaces by every such
operation two distinct capitals that had both been employed in
the agriculture or manufactures of that country, and thereby
enables them to continue that employment. When it sends out from
the residence of the merchant a certain value of commodities, it
generally brings back in return at least an equal value of other
commodities. When both are the produce of domestic industry, it
necessarily replaces by every such operation two distinct
capitals which had both been employed in supporting productive
labour, and thereby enables them to continue that support. The
capital which sends Scotch manufactures to London, and brings
back English corn and manufactures to Edinburgh, necessarily
replaces by every such operation, two British capitals which had
both been employed in the agriculture or manufactures of Great
Britain.
     The capital employed in purchasing foreign goods for home
consumption, when this purchase is made with the produce of
domestic industry, replaces too, by every such operation, two
distinct capitals; but one of them only is employed in supporting
domestic industry. The capital which sends British goods to
Portugal, and brings back Portuguese goods to Great Britain,
replaces by every such operation only one British capital. The
other is a Portuguese one. Though the returns, therefore, of the
foreign trade of consumption should be as quick as those of the
home trade, the capital employed in it will give but one half the
encouragement to the industry or productive labour of the
country.
     But the returns of the foreign trade of consumption are very
seldom so quick as those of the home trade. The returns of the
home trade generally come in before the end of the year, and
sometimes three or four times in the year. The returns of the
foreign trade of consumption seldom come in before the end of the
year, and sometimes not till after two or three years. A capital,
therefore, employed in the home trade will sometimes make twelve
operations, or be sent out and returned twelve times, before a
capital employed in the foreign trade of consumption has made
one. If the capitals are equal, therefore, the one will give
four-and-twenty times more encouragement and support to the
industry of the country than the other.
     The foreign goods for home consumption may sometimes be
purchased, not with the produce of domestic industry, but with
some other foreign goods. These last, however, must have been
purchased either immediately with the produce of domestic
industry, or with something else that had been purchased with it;
for, the case of war and conquest excepted, foreign goods can
ever be acquired but in exchange for something that had been
produced at home, either immediately, or after two or more
different exchanges. The effects, therefore, of a capital
employed in such a roundabout foreign trade of consumption, are,
in every respect, the same as those of one employed in the most
direct trade of the same kind, except that the final returns are
likely to be still more distant, as they must depend upon the
returns of two or three distinct foreign trades. If the flax and
hemp of Riga are purchased with the tobacco of Virginia, which
had been purchased with British manufactures, the merchant must
wait for the returns of two distinct foreign trades before he can
employ the same capital in re-purchasing a like quantity of
British manufactures. If the tobacco of Virginia had been
purchased, not with British manufactures, but with the sugar and
rum of Jamaica which had been purchased with those manufactures,
he must wait for the returns of three. If those two or three
distinct foreign trades should happen to be carried on by two or
three distinct merchants, of whom the second buys the goods
imported by the first, and the third buys those imported by the
second, in order to export them again, each merchant indeed will
in this case receive the returns of his own capital more quickly;
but the final returns of the whole capital employed in the trade
will be just as slow as ever. Whether the whole capital employed
in such a round-about trade belong to one merchant or to three
can make no difference with regard to the country, though it may
with regard to the particular merchants. Three times a greater
capital must in both cases be employed in order to exchange a
certain value of British manufactures for a certain quantity of
flax and hemp than would have been necessary had the manufactures
and the flax and hemp been directly exchanged for one another.
The whole capital employed, therefore, in such a round-about
foreign trade of consumption will generally give less
encouragement and support to the productive labour of the country
than an equal capital employed in a more direct trade of the same
kind.
     Whatever be the foreign commodity with which the foreign
goods for home consumption are purchased, it can occasion no
essential difference either in the nature of the trade, or in the
encouragement and support which it can give to the productive
labour of the country from which it is carried on. If they are
purchased with the gold of Brazil, for example, or with the
silver of Peru, this gold and silver, like the tobacco of
Virginia, must have been purchased with something that either was
the produce of the industry of the country, or that had been
purchased with something else that was so. So far, therefore, as
the productive labour of the country is concerned, the foreign
trade of consumption which is carried on by means of gold and
silver has all the advantages and all the inconveniences of any
other equally round-about foreign trade of consumption, and will
replace just as fast or just as slow the capital which is
immediately employed in supporting that productive labour. It
seems even to have one advantage over any other equally
roundabout foreign trade. The transportation of those metals from
one place to another, on account of their small bulk and great
value, is less expensive than that of almost any other foreign
goods of equal value. Their freight is much less, and their
insurance not greater; and no goods, besides, are less liable to
suffer by the carriage. An equal quantity of foreign goods,
therefore, may frequently be purchased with a smaller quantity of
the produce of domestic industry, by the intervention of gold and
silver, than by that of any other foreign goods. The demand of
the country may frequently, in this manner, be supplied more
completely and at a smaller expense than in any other. Whether,
by the continual exportation of those metals, a trade of this
kind is likely to impoverish the country from which it is carried
on, in any other way, I shall have occasion to examine at great
length hereafter.
     That part of the capital of any country which is employed in
the carrying trade is altogether withdrawn from supporting the
productive labour of that particular country, to support that of
some foreign countries. Though it may replace by every operation
two distinct capitals, yet neither of them belongs to that
particular country. The capital of the Dutch merchant, which
carries the corn of Poland to Portugal, and brings back the
fruits and wines of Portugal to Poland, replaces by every such
operation two capitals, neither of which had been employed in
supporting the productive labour of Holland; but one of them in
supporting that of Poland, and the other that of Portugal. The
profits only return regularly to Holland, and constitute the
whole addition which this trade necessarily makes to the annual
produce of the land and labour of that country. When, indeed, the
carrying trade of any particular country is carried on with the
ships and sailors of that country, that part of the capital
employed in it which pays the freight is distributed among, and
puts into motion, a certain number of productive labourers of
that country. Almost all nations that have had any considerable
share of the carrying trade have, in fact, carried it on in this
manner. The trade itself has probably derived its name from it,
the people of such countries being the carriers to other
countries. It does not, however, seem essential to the nature of
the trade that it should be so. A Dutch merchant may, for
example, employ his capital in transacting the commerce of Poland
and Portugal, by carrying part of the surplus produce of the one
to the other, not in Dutch, but in British bottoms. It may be
presumed that he actually does so upon some particular occasions.
It is upon this account, however, that the carrying trade has
been supposed peculiarly advantageous to such a country as Great
Britain, of which the defence and security depend upon the number
of its sailors and shipping. But the same capital may employ as
many sailors and shipping, either in the foreign trade of
consumption, or even in the home trade, when carried on by
coasting vessels, as it could in the carrying trade. The number
of sailors and shipping which any particular capital can employ
does not depend upon the nature of the trade, but partly upon the
bulk of the goods in proportion to their value, and partly upon
the distance of the ports between which they are to be carried;
chiefly upon the former of those two circumstances. The coal
trade from Newcastle to London, for example, employs more
shipping than all the carrying trade of England, though the ports
are at no great distance. To force, therefore, by extraordinary
encouragements, a larger share of the capital of any country into
the carrying trade than what would naturally go to it will not
always necessarily increase the shipping of that country.
     The capital, therefore, employed in the home trade of any
country will generally give encouragement and support to a
greater quantity of productive labour in that country, and
increase the value of its annual produce more than an equal
capital employed in the foreign trade of consumption: and the
capital employed in this latter trade has in both these respects
a still greater advantage over an equal capital employed in the
carrying trade. The riches, and so far as power depends upon
riches, the power of every country must always be in proportion
to the value of its annual produce, the fund from which all taxes
must ultimately be paid. But the great object of the political
economy of every country is to increase the riches and power of
that country. It ought, therefore, to give no preference nor
superior encouragement to the foreign trade of consumption above
the home trade, nor to the carrying trade above either of the
other two. It ought neither to force nor to allure into either of
those two channels a greater share of the capital of the country
than what would naturally flow into them of its own accord.
     When the produce of any particular branch of industry
exceeds what the demand of the country requires, the surplus must
be sent abroad and exchanged for something for which there is a
demand at home. Without such exportation a part of the productive
labour of the country must cease, and the value of its annual
produce diminish. The land and labour of Great Britain produce
generally more corn, woollens, and hardware than the demand of
the home market requires. The surplus part of them, therefore,
must be sent abroad, and exchanged for something for which there
is a demand at home. It is only by means of such exportation that
this surplus can acquire a value sufficient to compensate the
labour and expense of producing it. The neighbourhood of the
sea-coast, and the banks of all navigable rivers, are
advantageous situations for industry, only because they
facilitate the exportation and exchange of such surplus produce
for something else which is more in demand there.
     When the foreign goods which are thus purchased with the
surplus produce of domestic industry exceed the demand of the
home market, the surplus part of them must be sent abroad again
and exchanged for something more in demand at home. About
ninety-six thousand hogsheads of tobacco are annually purchased
in Virginia and Maryland with a part of the surplus produce of
British industry. But the demand of Great Britain does not
require, perhaps, more than fourteen thousand. If the remaining
eighty-two thousand, therefore, could not be sent abroad and
exchanged for something more in demand at home, the importation
of them must cease immediately, and with it the productive labour
of all those inhabitants of Great Britain, who are at present
employed in preparing the goods with which these eighty-two
thousand hogsheads are annually purchased. Those goods, which are
part of the produce of the land and labour of Great Britain,
having no market at home, and being deprived of that which they
had abroad, must cease to be produced. The most round-about
foreign trade of consumption, therefore may, upon some occasions,
be as necessary for supporting the productive labour of the
country, and the value of its annual produce, as the most direct.
     When the capital stock of any country is increased to such a
degree that it cannot be all employed in supplying the
consumption and supporting the productive labour of that
particular country, the surplus part of it naturally disgorges
itself into the carrying trade, and is employed in performing the
same offices to other countries. The carrying trade is the
natural effect and symptom of great national wealth; but it does
not seem to be the natural cause of it. Those statesmen who have
been disposed to favour it with particular encouragements seem to
have mistaken the effect and symptom for the cause. Holland, in
proportion to the extent of the land and the number of its
inhabitants, by far the richest country in Europe, has,
accordingly, the greatest share of the carrying trade of Europe.
England, perhaps the second richest country of Europe, is
likewise supposed to have a considerable share of it; though what
commonly passes for the carrying trade of England will
frequently, perhaps, be found to be no more than a round-about
foreign trade of consumption. Such are, in a great measure, the
trades which carry the goods of the East and West Indies, and of
America, to different European markets. Those goods are generally
purchased either immediately with the produce of British
industry, or with something else which had been purchased with
that produce, and the final returns of those trades are generally
used or consumed in Great Britain. The trade which is carried on
in British bottoms between the different ports of the
Mediterranean, and some trade of the same kind carried on by
British merchants between the different ports of India, make,
perhaps, the principal branches of what is properly the carrying
trade of Great Britain.
     The extent of the home trade and of the capital which can be
employed in it, is necessarily limited by the value of the
surplus produce of all those distant places within the country
which have occasion to exchange their respective productions with
another: that of the foreign trade of consumption, by the value
of the surplus produce of the whole country and of what can be
purchased with it: that of the carrying trade by the value of the
surplus produce of all the different countries in the world. Its
possible extent, therefore, is in a manner infinite in comparison
of that of the other two, and is capable of absorbing the
greatest capitals.
     The consideration of his own private profit is the sole
motive which determines the owner of any capital to employ it
either in agriculture, in manufactures, or in some particular
branch of the wholesale or retail trade. The different quantities
of productive labour which it may put into motion, and the
different values which it may add to the annual, produce of the
land and labour of the society, according as it is employed in
one or other of those different ways, never enter into his
thoughts. In countries, therefore, where agriculture is the most
profitable of all employments, and farming and improving the most
direct roads to a splendid fortune, the capitals of individuals
will naturally be employed in the manner most advantageous to the
whole society. The profits of agriculture, however, seem to have
no superiority over those of other employments in any part of
Europe. Projectors, indeed, in every corner of it, have within
these few years amused the public with most magnificent accounts
of the profits to be made by the cultivation and improvement of
land. Without entering into any particular discussion of their
calculations, a very simple observation may satisfy us that the
result of them must be false. We see every day the most splendid
fortunes that have been acquired in the course of a single life
by trade and manufacturers, frequently from a very small capital,
sometimes from no capital. A single instance of such a fortune
acquired by agriculture in the same time, and from such a
capital, has not, perhaps, occurred in Europe during the course
of the present century. In all the great countries of Europe,
however, much good land still remains uncultivated, and the
greater part of what is cultivated is far from being improved to
the degree of which it is capable. Agriculture, therefore, is
almost everywhere capable of absorbing a much greater capital
than has ever yet been employed in it. What circumstances in the
policy of Europe have given the trades which are carried on in
towns so great an advantage over that which is carried on in the
country that private persons frequently find it more for their
advantage to employ their capitals in the most distant carrying
trades of Asia and America than in the improvement and
cultivation of the most fertile fields in their own
neighbourhood, I shall endeavour to explain at full length in the
two following books.

